.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2021 Gwen Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH endianness 7scm 2021-03-06 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
endianness \- quote an endianness symbol
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs bytevectors))" "         ;R6RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(endianness " endianness-symbol )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B endianness
syntax quotes the
.IR endianness-symbol ,
while ensuring that it is one of the supported endiannesses in the
implementation.
.PP
An implementation must
support at least the symbols
.B big
and
.BR little ,
but may support other endianness symbols.
.
.SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
.
.TP
.B Larcency Scheme
Using this syntax causes a deprecation warning to be printed.
.
.SH "EVALUATION"
.
This syntax evaluates to one of the supported endianness symbols.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(endianness little)
          => little

(endianness big)
          => big
.EE
.
.SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
.
This is used as an argument to bytevector procedures.
.SH RATIONALE
.
The native endianness is not included as an option, like it was in
SRFI-74. It would have unnecessarily caused the expansion of a program
to depend on the machine on which it's expanded.
.PP
It is impossible to tell if a new endianness will become popular in
the future, so extensions are allowed.
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
This syntax works the same everywhere that it's supported (but see
Implementation Notes above).
.SH ERRORS
This syntax can raise exceptions during expansion with the following
condition types:
.TP
.BR &syntax " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of operands was given or the operand was not a supported
endianness symbol.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR native-endianness (3scm),
.BR bytevector-u16-ref (3scm)
.SH STANDARDS
R6RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
This syntax is new for R6RS and first appeared in SRFI-74.
.PP
There have been mixed-endianness machines, such as the PDP-11, which
do not fit as either big or little.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
