.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2023 G. Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH abs 3scm 2023-02-14 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
abs \- compute the absolute value of the argument
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs base))" "                ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (scheme r5rs))" "              ;R7RS"
.BR "(import (scheme base))" "              ;R7RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs arithmetic flonums))" "  ;R6RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(abs " number )
.BI "(flabs " number )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Returns the absolute value of
.IR number .
This is only defined for real numbers.
.
\" .SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
\" .
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single value; a number. The flonum variant always returns a flonum.
.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(abs -47)     =>  47
(flabs -0.0)  =>  0.0
(abs -inf.0)  =>  +inf.0
.EE
.
\" .SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
\" .
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
Except for differences in error handling and which types of numbers
are supported, these procedures work the same everywhere.
.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
In particular,
.I number
must be a real number and for the flonum variant it must be a flonum.
.
.TP
R7RS
The assertions described above are errors.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR magnitude (3scm)
.
.SH STANDARDS
R4RS,
IEEE Scheme,
R5RS,
R6RS,
R7RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
In R2RS and R3RS the
.B abs
procedure accepted a complex number and returned its magnitude.
Scheme earlier than R2RS, running on MacLISP, had access to the
.B abs
subroutine that accepted a real number. LISP 1.5 does not seem to have
had this function but an example definition is given as an
M-expression in the LISP 1.5 Programmer's Manual.
.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
