.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2023 Gwen Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH append 3scm 2023-02-08 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
append \- append an object to one or multiple lists
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs base))" "                ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (scheme r5rs))" "              ;R7RS"
.BR "(import (scheme base))" "              ;R7RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI (append)
.BI "(append " list " ... " obj )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Returns a possibly improper list consisting of the elements
of the first
.I list
followed by the elements of the other
.IR list s,
with
.I obj
as the cdr of the final pair.
.PP
An improper list
results if
.I obj
is not a list. Returns the empty list if called with no arguments.
.PP
The return value is made from new pairs for all arguments
but the last; the last is merely placed at the end of the new
structure.
.
\" .SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
\" .
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single value. An improper list results if
.I obj
is not a proper list.
.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(append '(x) '(y))         =>  (x y)
(append '(a) '(b c d))     =>  (a b c d)
(append '(a (b)) '((c)))   =>  (a (b) (c))
(append '(a b) '(c . d))   =>  (a b c . d)
(append '() 'a)            =>  a
(append)                   =>  ()
(append 'a)                =>  a
.EE
.
\" .SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
\" .
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
Except for differences in error behavior, this procedure works the
same everywhere.
.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
.TP
R7RS
The assertions described above are errors.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR cons* (3scm),
.BR cons (3scm),
.BR list-tail (3scm)
.
.SH STANDARDS
R4RS,
IEEE Scheme,
R5RS,
R6RS,
R7RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
.\" LISP_Prog_Man-Mar_1959.pdf
The
.B append
procedure has existed in LISP since at least 1959.
The variants before R3RS only accepted proper lists.
Scheme before R2RS running on MacLISP accept any number of argments,
while in LISP 1.5 the procedure only accepted two arguments.
.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
