.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright © 2021 Göran Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH bitwise-bit-count 3scm 2021-03-08 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
bitwise-bit-count \- population count
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs arithmetic bitwise))" "  ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs arithmetic fixnums))" "  ;R6RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(bitwise-bit-count " ei )
.BI "(fxbit-count " fx )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
If the argument is non-negative, this procedure returns the number
of 1 bits in its two's complement representation.
Otherwise it returns the result of the following computation:
.EX
(bitwise-not (bitwise-bit-count (bitwise-not ei)))
.EE
.
\" .SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
\" .
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single exact integer object.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(bitwise-bit-count #b1)
          => 1

(bitwise-bit-count #b1000)
          => 1

(bitwise-bit-count #b1001)
          => 2

(bitwise-bit-count #b-1001)
          => -2
.EE
.
.SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
.
This procedure is used to compute the Hamming distance. It's also used
in Hash Array Mapped Tries and other applications.
.
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
This procedure is new in R6RS. SRFI-151 has the similar
procedure
.BR bit-count .
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
For
.B fxbit-count
the argument must be a fixnum.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR bitwise-first-bit-set (3scm),
.BR bitwise-length (3scm)
.SH STANDARDS
R6RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
This procedure can be implemented with the
.B popcount
procedure in x86-64 processors. This instruction appeared even in some
early computers like the IBM Stretch (1961).
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
