.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2021 G. Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH bitwise-bit-set? 3scm 2021-03-09 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
bitwise-bit-set?, fxbit-set? \- test if a bit is set in an exact integer
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs arithmetic bitwise))" "  ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs arithmetic fixnums))" "  ;R6RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(bitwise-bit-set? " ei " " k )
.BI "(fxbit-set? " fx " " k )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Returns
.B #t
if the
.IR k th
bit is 1 in the two's complement
representation of
.I ei
or
.IR fx ,
respectively, and
.B #f
otherwise.
.PP
This is the result of the following computation:
.EX
  ; bitwise-bit-set?
  (not (zero? (bitwise-and (bitwise-arithmetic-shift-left 1 k)
                           ei)))

  ; fxbit-set?
  (if (fx>=? k (fx- (fixnum-width) 1))
      (fxnegative? fx)
      (not (fxzero? (fxand fx (fxarithmetic-shift-left 1 k)))))
.EE
.
\" .SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
\" .
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single boolean object.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(bitwise-bit-set? #b101 0)
          =>  #t

(bitwise-bit-set? #b101 1)
          =>  #f
.EE
.
\" .SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
\" .
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
This procedure is new in R6RS. SRFI-151 has the similar procedure
.BR bit-set? .
.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
Raised if \fIk\fP is negative.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR bitwise-arithmetic-shift-right (3scm),
.BR bitwise-first-bit-set (3scm),
.BR bitwise-length (3scm)
.SH STANDARDS
R6RS
.
\" .SH HISTORY
\" .
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
.
.SH BUGS
.
Note that even in the fixnum variant, \fIk\fP is allowed to be greater
than the fixnum width. There have been bugs related to this aspect in
Sagittarius 0.4.9 and IronScheme TFS:101169.
