.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2022 G. Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH bitwise-first-bit-set 3scm 2022-04-09 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
bitwise-first-bit-set, fxfirst-bit-set \- first bit set in an integer
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs arithmetic bitwise))" "  ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs arithmetic fixnums))" "  ;R6RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(bitwise-first-bit-set " ei )
.BI "(fxfirst-bit-set " fx )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Returns the index of the least significant 1 bit in the two's
complement representation of the argument. If it is 0, then −1 is
returned.
.PP
The argument to
.B fxfirst-bit-set
must be in the implementation's fixnum range.
.
\" .SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
\" .
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
Returns a single value; an exact integer.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(bitwise-first-bit-set 0)   =>  -1
(bitwise-first-bit-set 1)   =>  0
(bitwise-first-bit-set -4)  =>  2
.EE
.
.SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
.
These procedures have a variety of uses, e.g. for using integers to
represent sets, and some bit-hacks.
.SH RATIONALE
.
Some CPUs have an instruction that is similar to this procedure, such
as the \f[CR]BSF\fP instruction in the x86 ISA. If it was instead
defined by user code then it would be much slower.
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
The fixnum variant of this procedure works with the
implementation-defined fixnum range.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR bitwise-length (3scm)
.SH STANDARDS
R4RS,
IEEE Scheme,
R5RS,
R6RS,
R7RS,
SRFI-60, SRFI-143, SRFI-151
.
.SH HISTORY
.
These procedures are new in R6RS.
.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
