.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright © 2023 Göran Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH bitwise-if 3scm 2023-02-12 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
bitwise-if, fxif \- bitwise if
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs arithmetic bitwise))" "  ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs arithmetic fixnums))" "  ;R6RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(bitwise-if " mask " " a " " b )
.BI "(fxif " mask " " a " " b )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Returns the number that is the bit-wise "if" of the two's complement
representations of its arguments, i.e. for each bit, if it is 1 in
.IR mask ,
the corresponding bit in
.I a
becomes the value of the corresponding bit in the result, and if it is
0, the corresponding bit in
.I b
becomes the corresponding bit in the value of the result.
.
.SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
.
The following are reference implementations from R6RS:
.
.EX
(bitwise-ior (bitwise-and mask a)
             (bitwise-and (bitwise-not mask) b))

(fxior (fxand mask a)
       (fxand (fxnot mask) b))
.EE
.
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns an single value; an exact integer. The fixnum variant returns
a fixnum.
.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.\" The second example is from SRFI-151 by John Cowan
.EX
(bitwise-if #xf0f0 #x1234 #xABCD)  =>  #x1B3D
(bitwise-if #b00111100 #b11110000 #b00001111) => #b00110011
.EE
.
\" .SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
\" .
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
These procedures are unique to R6RS. Compatible procedures can be
found in SRFI-60 and SRFI-151.
.
.SH ERRORS
These procedures can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
.TP
R7RS
The assertions described above are errors.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR bitwise-and (3scm),
.BR bitwise-ior (3scm),
.BR bitwise-copy-bit (3scm),
.BR bitwise-copy-bit-field (3scm)
.
.SH STANDARDS
R6RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
These procedures first appeared in R6RS which got the idea from
SRFI-60.
.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
