.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2023 G. Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH bitwise-copy-bit-field 3scm 2023-02-13 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
bitwise-copy-bit-field, fxcopy-bit-field \- copy a bitfield from one integer onto another
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs arithmetic bitwise))" "  ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs arithmetic fixnums))" "  ;R6RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(bitwise-copy-bit-field " to " " start " " end " " from )
.BI "(fxcopy-bit-field " to " " start " " end " " from )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Returns the result of replacing in
.I to
the bits at positions from
.I start
(inclusive) to
.I end
(exclusive) by the bits in
.I from
from position 0 (inclusive) to
position
.IR end − start
(exclusive).
.
.SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
.
The following are reference implementations from R6RS.
.PP
.EX
; bitwise-copy-bit-field
(let* ((mask1
        (bitwise-arithmetic-shift-left -1 start))
       (mask2
        (bitwise-not
         (bitwise-arithmetic-shift-left -1 end)))
       (mask (bitwise-and mask1 mask2)))
  (bitwise-if mask
              (bitwise-arithmetic-shift-left from start)
              to))

; fxcopy-bit-field
(let* ((mask1 (fxarithmetic-shift-left -1 start))
       (mask2 (fxnot
               (fxarithmetic-shift-left -1 end)))
       (mask (fxand mask1 mask2))
       (mask3 (fxnot (fxarithmetic-shift-left
                       -1 (- end start)))))
  (fxif mask
        (fxarithmetic-shift-left (fxand from mask3)
                                 start)
        to))
.EE
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single value; an exact integer. The fixnum variant returns a
fixnum.
.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(fxcopy-bit-field #b0000001 2 5 #b1111000)
          => 1
(fxcopy-bit-field #b0000001 2 5 #b0001111)
          => 29
(fxcopy-bit-field #b0001111 2 5 #b0001111)
          => 31
.EE
.
\" .SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
\" .
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
This procedure is unique to R6RS.
.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
In particular,
.I start
and
.I end
must be non-negative, and
.I start
must be less than or equal to
.IR end .
.
.IP
The fixnum variant furthermore requires that all arguments are
fixnums and that
.I start
and
.I end
are less than \f[CR](fixnum-width)\fP.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR bitwise-copy-bit (3scm),
.BR bitwise-bit-field (3scm),
.BR bitwise-ior (3scm)
.BR bitwise-arithmetic-shift (3scm)
.
.SH STANDARDS
R6RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
These procedures first appeared in R6RS. There is a similar procedure
in SRFI-60 that uses a different argument order,
.BR copy-bit-field .
.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
