.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2021 G. Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH bitwise-bit-field 3scm 2021-03-11 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
bitwise-bit-field, fxbit-field \- bit field extract
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs arithmetic bitwise))" "  ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs arithmetic fixnums))" "  ;R6RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(bitwise-bit-field " ei " " start " " end )
.BI "(fxbit-field " fx " " start " " end )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Returns the number represented by the bits at the positions
from
.I start
(inclusive) to
.I end
(exclusive), which is the result of the following computation:
.EX
;; bitwise-bit-field
(let ((mask (bitwise-not
             (bitwise-arithmetic-shift-left -1 end))))
  (bitwise-arithmetic-shift-right (bitwise-and ei mask)
                                  start))

;; fxbit-field
(let ((mask (fxnot
             (fxarithmetic-shift-left -1 end))))
  (fxarithmetic-shift-right (fxand fx mask)
                            start))
.EE
.
\" .SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
\" .
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single exact integer object.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(fxbit-field #b10101111 4 8)
          => #b1010

(fxbit-field #b10101111 0 4)
          => #b1111
.EE
.
.SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
.
The operation implemented by these procedures shows up when several
fields are encoded in a single integer. A typical example is the code
in a Scheme implementation that parses binary IEEE 754 floating point.
This pattern also appears often in binary file formats, network
protocols, machine code, encryption and much more.
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
These procedures are new in R6RS. SRFI-151 has the generic procedure
under the name
.BR bit-field .
.SH ERRORS
These procedures can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
The arguments \fIstart\fP and \fIend\fP must be non-negative and
\fIstart\fP must be less than or equal to \fIend\fP. The
.B fxbit-field
procedure requires that all arguments are fixnums.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR bitwise-arithmetic-shift (3scm),
.BR bitwise-and (3scm)
.SH STANDARDS
R6RS
\" .
\" .SH HISTORY
\" .
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
