.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2023 Gwen Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH bitwise-copy-bit 3scm 2023-02-12 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
bitwise-copy-bit, fxcopy-bit \- copy a bit from an integer onto another integer
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs arithmetic bitwise))" "  ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs arithmetic fixnums))" "  ;R6RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(bitwise-copy-bit " n " " k " " bit )
.BI "(fxcopy-bit " n " " k " " bit )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Returns the result of replacing the
.I k th
bit of
.I n
by
.IR bit .
.
.SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
.
The following are reference implementations from R6RS.
.PP
.EX
;; bitwise-copy-bit
(let ((mask (bitwise-arithmetic-shift-left 1 k)))
  (bitwise-if mask
              (bitwise-arithmetic-shift-left bit k)
              n))

;; fxcopy-bit
(let ((mask (fxarithmetic-shift-left 1 k)))
  (fxif mask
        (fxarithmetic-shift-left bit k)
        n))
.EE
.
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single value; an exact integer.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(bitwise-copy-bit 0 10 1)       =>  1024
(bitwise-copy-bit #x8000 0 1)   =>  #x8001
(bitwise-copy-bit #x8001 15 0)  =>  #x0001
.EE
.
\" .SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
\" .
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
These procedures are unique to R6RS. Similar procedures can be found
in SRFI-60 and SRFI-151.
.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
In particular,
.I k must
be non-negative, and
.I bit
must be either 0 or 1.
The fixnum variant further requires that
.I n
is a fixnum and that
.I k
is non-negative and less than \f[CR](fixnum-width)\fP-1.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR bitwise-if (3scm),
.BR bitwise-bit-set? (3scm)
.
.SH STANDARDS
R6RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
These procedures first appeared in R6RS. There was previously a
similar procedure in SRFI-60,
.BR copy-bit .
.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
.
.SH BUGS
.
If
.I k
is very large then an implementation might try to allocate an
excessive amount of memory. In normal implementations it is expected
that all practical values of
.I k
are fixnums.
