.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2021 Gwen Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH boolean? 3scm 2021-01-17 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
boolean? \- test if an object is a boolean
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs base))" "                ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (scheme r5rs))" "              ;R7RS"
.BR "(import (scheme base))" "              ;R7RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(boolean? " obj )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Returns \fB#t\fP if \fIobj\fP is an exact integer object within the
fixnum range, \fB#f\fP otherwise.
.
\" .SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
\" .
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single boolean object as per the description.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(boolean? #f)    => #t
(boolean? 0)     => #f
(boolean? '())   => #f
.EE
.
\" .SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
\" .
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
\" .SH COMPATIBILITY
\" .
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed.
.TP
R7RS
The assertions described above are errors.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR not (3scm)
.SH STANDARDS
R4RS,
IEEE Scheme,
R5RS,
R6RS,
R7RS
.
\" .SH HISTORY
\" .
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
