.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2021 Gwen Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH bytevector-copy 3scm 2021-02-20 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
bytevector-copy \- copy a bytevector
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs bytevectors))" "         ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (scheme base))" "              ;R7RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(bytevector-copy " bytevector )
.BI "(bytevector-copy " bytevector " " start ) "      \fR;R7RS\fP"
.BI "(bytevector-copy " bytevector " " start " " end ) "  \fR;R7RS\fP"
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Returns a newly allocated bytevector containing the bytes in
\fIbytevector\fP between \fIstart\fP (inclusive) and \fIend\fP
(exclusive).
.PP
The default value for \fIstart\fP is 0 and the default value
for \fIend\fP is equal to the length of the input.
\" .SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
\" .
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a bytevector with the length \fIend\fP - \fIstart\fP.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(define a #u8(1 2 3 4 5))
(bytevector-copy a 2 4))
   => #u8(3 4)
.EE
.
\" .SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
\" .
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
The R6RS version of this procedure only has the first argument.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
.TP
R7RS
The assertions described above are errors.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR bytevector-copy! (3scm)
.SH STANDARDS
R6RS,
R7RS
.
\" .SH HISTORY
\" .
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
