.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2021 Gwen Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH bytevector-append 3scm 2021-02-28 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
bytevector-append \- append bytevectors
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (scheme base))" "              ;R7RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(bytevector-append " bytevector " " ... )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Returns a newly allocated bytevector whose elements are
the concatenation of the elements in the given bytevectors.
.
\" .SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
\" .
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single bytevector object.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(bytevector-append #u8(0 1 2) #u8(3 4 5))
          => #u8(0 1 2 3 4 5)
.EE
.
\" .SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
\" .
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
This procedure is absent from R6RS. One possible implementation is
shown below.
.EX
(define (bytevector-append . bvs)
  (call-with-bytevector-output-port
    (lambda (p)
      (for-each (lambda (bv) (put-bytevector p bv)) bvs))))
.EE
.SH ERRORS
It is an error if one of the arguments is not a bytevector.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR make-bytevector (3scm),
.BR append (3scm)
.SH STANDARDS
R7RS
\" .
\" .SH HISTORY
\" .
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
