.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2020 G. Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH caaar 3scm 2020-04-18 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
caaar, ..., cddddr \- additional compositions of car and cdr
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs base))" "                ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (scheme r5rs))" "              ;R7RS"
.BR "(import (scheme cxr))" "               ;R7RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(caaar " pair )
.BR "(caaar " pair )
.BR "(caadr " pair )
.BR "(cadar " pair )
.BR "(caddr " pair )
.BR "(cdaar " pair )
.BR "(cdadr " pair )
.BR "(cddar " pair )
.BR "(cdddr " pair )
.BR "(caaaar " pair )
.BR "(caaadr " pair )
.BR "(caadar " pair )
.BR "(caaddr " pair )
.BR "(cadaar " pair )
.BR "(cadadr " pair )
.BR "(caddar " pair )
.BR "(cadddr " pair )
.BR "(cdaaar " pair )
.BR "(cdaadr " pair )
.BR "(cdadar " pair )
.BR "(cdaddr " pair )
.BR "(cddaar " pair )
.BR "(cddadr " pair )
.BR "(cdddar " pair )
.BR "(cddddr " pair )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
These twenty-four procedures are further compositions of \fBcar\fP and
\fBcdr\fP on the same principles as
.BR caar (3scm).
For example, \fBcaddr\fP could be
defined by
.PP
.EX
  (define caddr (lambda (x) (car (cdr (cdr x))))).
.EE
.PP
Arbitrary compositions up to four deep are provided.
.
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns the contents of the car or cdr field of the pair which is the
next to last pair through the chain of pairs.
.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(cadar '(((a . b) . (c . d)) ((1 . 2) . (3 . 4)))) => c
(cddddr '(1 2 3 4 5 6))                            => (5 6)
.EE
.
.SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
.
These compositions are increasingly harder to read and reason about.
It is a good idea to instead use a pattern matching library like
.BR "(chibi match)" .
.\" .SH RATIONALE
.\" .
.\" In R7RS these procedures were moved to their own library. This was done
.\" because TODO
.\" .
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed, the argument was not a pair
or one of the intermediate links of car and cdr fields was not a pair.
.TP
R7RS
The assertions described above are errors.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR caar (3scm)
.
.SH STANDARDS
R4RS,
IEEE Scheme,
R5RS,
R6RS,
R7RS
.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
