.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright © 2022 Göran Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH call-with-port 3scm 2022-05-01 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
call-with-port \- call a procedure with a port, closing it afterwards
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs io ports))" "            ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (scheme base))" "              ;R7RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(call-with-port " port " " proc )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION

Calls
.I proc
with
.I port
as an argument. If
.I proc
returns,
.I port
is closed automatically and the values returned
by
.I proc
are returned.
.PP
If
.I proc
does not return,
.I port
is not closed automatically, except perhaps when it is possible to
prove that
.I port
will never again be used for an input or output operation.
.
\" .SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
\" .
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns whatever values
.I proc
returns.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(call-with-port (open-input-file "config.scm") read)
.EE
.PP
There are also examples in the
.BR put-bytevector (3scm)
and
.BR put-u8 (3scm)
pages.
.
.SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
.
This procedure is a convenience that sometimes makes it easier to
structure code.
.
.SH RATIONALE
.
Because Scheme's escape procedures have unlimited
extent, it is possible to escape from the current continuation
but later to resume it. If implementations were permitted to
close the port on any escape from the current continuation,
then it would be impossible to write portable code using both
.BR call-with-current-continuation (3scm)
and
.BR call-with-port (3scm).
.
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
This procedure is identical in R6RS and R7RS, apart from the
differences in error handling.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
In particular, this is raised if
.I procedure
does not accept one argument.
.TP
R7RS
The assertions described above are errors.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR call-with-bytevector-output-port (3scm),
.BR call-with-string-output-port (3scm),
.BR call-with-input-file (3scm),
.BR with-input-from-file (3scm)
.
.SH STANDARDS
R6RS,
R7RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
This procedure is new in R6RS and later also became new in R7RS.
.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
