.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2023 G. Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH call-with-bytevector-output-port 3scm 2023-02-15 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
call-with-bytevector-output-port \- call a procedure with a bytevector output port
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs io ports))" "            ;R6RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(call-with-bytevector-output-port " proc )
.BI "(call-with-bytevector-output-port " proc " " maybe-transcoder )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Creates an output port that accumulates the bytes written to it and
calls
.I proc
with that output port as an argument.
.
Whenever
.I proc
returns, a bytevector consisting of all of the port's accumulated
bytes (regardless of the port’s current position) is returned and the
port is closed.
.PP
The transcoder associated with the output port is determined as for a
call to
.BR open-bytevector-output-port (3scm).
.
\" .SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
\" .
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single value; a bytevector.
.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(call-with-bytevector-output-port
  (lambda (p)
    (put-u8 p 7)))
        => #vu8(7)

(call-with-bytevector-output-port
  (lambda (p)
    (put-string p "0123"))
  (native-transcoder))
        => #vu8(48 49 50 51)
.EE
.
.SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
.
This procedure is commonly used when creating bytevectors piecemeal.
.
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
This procedure is unique to R6RS. It is a wrapper around
.BR open-bytevector-output-port (3scm).
.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
In particular,
.I proc
must be a procedure that can accept one argument, and
.I maybe-transcoder
must be a transcoder or \f[CR]#f\fP.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR open-bytevector-output-port (3scm),
.BR open-bytevector-input-port (3scm)
.
.SH STANDARDS
R6RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
This procedure is new to the reworked I/O in R6RS.
.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
