.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2023 G. Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH call-with-string-output-port 3scm 2023-02-15 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
call-with-string-output-port \- call a procedure with a string output port
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs io ports))" "            ;R6RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(call-with-string-output-port " proc )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Creates a textual output port that accumulates the characters written
to it and calls
.I proc
with that output port as an argument.
.
Whenever
.I proc
returns, a string consisting of all of the port's accumulated
characters (regardless of the port's current position) is returned and
the port is closed.
.PP
The port should support the
.BR port-position (3scm)
and
.BR set-port-position! (3scm)
operations.
.
.SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
.
The port may or may not have an associated transcoder; if it does, the
transcoder is implementation-dependent.
.
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single value; a string.
.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(call-with-string-output-port
  (lambda (p)
    (for-each (lambda (x)
                (display x p))
              '("Hello " world #\\newline))))
        => "Hello world\\n"
.EE
.
.SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
.
This procedure is commonly used when creating strings piecemeal.
.
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
This procedure is unique to R6RS. It is a wrapper around
.BR open-string-output-port (3scm).
.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
In particular,
.I proc
must be a procedure that accepts one argument.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR call-with-string-output-port (3scm),
.BR open-string-output-port (3scm)
.BR open-string-input-port (3scm)
.
.SH STANDARDS
R6RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
This procedure is new to the reworked I/O in R6RS.
.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
