.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright © 2020 Göran Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH car 3scm 2020-04-18 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
car, cdr \- the car or cdr field of a pair (head and tail)
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs base))" "                ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (scheme base))" "              ;R7RS"
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(car " pair ")"
.BI "(cdr " pair ")"
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.
Returns the contents of the car or cdr field of a pair.
.PP
These procedures can also be used with lists, which in Scheme are
linked lists of pairs.
The \fIcar\fP procedure returns the head of a list.
The \fIcdr\fP procedure returns the tail of a list.
.PP
.
.SH RETURN VALUES
.
Returns the contents of the car or cdr field of
.IR pair .
.
.SH ERRORS
.
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The argument is not a pair.
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed.
.TP
R7RS
The situations described above are errors.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH STANDARDS
R4RS,
IEEE Scheme,
R5RS,
R6RS,
R7RS
.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(car '(a b c))      => a
(car '((a) b c d))  => (a)
(car '(1 . 2))      => 1
(car '())           => &assertion exception

(cdr '((a) b c d))  => (b c d)
(cdr '(1 . 2))      => 2
(cdr '())           => &assertion exception
.EE
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.
.BR cons (3scm),
.BR list-ref (3scm),
.BR pairs (7scm),
.BR set-car! (3scm)
.
.SH HISTORY
.
Present in MIT AI Memo No.\~1 (September 1958).
.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
