.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2021 G. Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH char-general-category 3scm 2021-02-21 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
char-general-category \- Unicode character category
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs unicode))" "             ;R6RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(char-general-category " char )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Returns a symbol representing the Unicode general category of
.IR char .
.PP
The category is one of the following symbols.
.PP
.TS
center allbox;
c c
c c .
\fBSymbol\fP	\fBDescription\fP
Lu	Letter, uppercase
Ll	Letter, lowercase
Lt	Letter, titlecase
Lm	Letter, modifier
Lo	Letter, other
Mn	Mark, nonspacing
Mc	Mark, spacing combining
Me	Mark, enclosing
Nd	Number, decimal digit
Nl	Number, letter
No	Number, other
Pc	Punctuation, connector
Pd	Punctuation, dash
Ps	Punctuation, open
Pe	Punctuation, close
Pi	Punctuation, initial quote
Pf	Punctuation, final
Po	Punctuation, other
Sm	Symbol, math
Sc	Symbol, currency
Sk	Symbol, modifier
So	Symbol, other
Zs	Separator, space
Zl	Separator, line
Zp	Separator, paragraph
Cc	Other, control
Cf	Other, format
Cs	Other, surrogate
Co	Other, private use
Cn	Other, not assigned
.TE
.
\" .SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
\" .
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single symbol.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(char-general-category #\\a)
   => Ll
(char-general-category #\\space)
   => Zs
(char-general-category #\\x10FFFF)
   => Cn
.EE
.
.SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
.
This procedure commonly appears in Scheme readers. Both R6RS and R7RS
define the lexical syntax in terms of Unicode general categories.
Another use is in algorithms for rendering text.
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
This procedure is only present in R6RS (but any implementation that
supports Unicode will necessarily have access to the data). The exact
values returned will depend on which version of the Unicode database
was used to generate the lookup tables.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR char-alphabetic? (3scm)
.SH STANDARDS
R6RS
.
\" .SH HISTORY
\" .
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
