.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright © 2021 Göran Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH char=? 3scm 2021-02-20 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
char=?, char<?, char>?, char<=?, char>=? \- character comparison
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs base))" "                ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (scheme r5rs))" "              ;R7RS"
.BR "(import (scheme base))" "              ;R7RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(char=? " char " " char " " char " ...)"
.BI "(char<? " char " " char " " char " ...)"
.BI "(char>? " char " " char " " char " ...)"
.BI "(char<=? " char " " char " " char " ...)"
.BI "(char>=? " char " " char " " char " ...)"
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
These procedures return \fB#t\fP if the results of passing their
arguments to \fBchar->integer\fP are (respectively): equal, monotonically
increasing, monotonically decreasing, monotonically nondecreasing, or
monotonically nonincreasing, and \fB#f\fP otherwise.
.PP
In R6RS systems, these procedures impose a total ordering on the set
of characters according to their Unicode scalar values.
.
\" .SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
\" .
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single boolean value.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(char<? #\\z #\\ß)  =>  #t
(char<? #\\z #\\Z)  =>  #f
.EE
.
\" .SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
\" .
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
Both R6RS and R7RS define the order based on the Unicode scalar values
of characters, but R7RS not require full Unicode support and also
permits non-Unicode characters.
.PP
These procedures exist in R5RS and earlier reports, but they were only
required to support two arguments.
.PP
IEEE Scheme uses the ≤ and ≥ characters instead of <= and >= in the
procedure entries, but this is probably a typo.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
.TP
R7RS
The assertions described above are errors.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR char-ci=? (3scm)
.SH STANDARDS
R4RS,
IEEE Scheme,
R5RS,
R6RS,
R7RS
.
\" .SH HISTORY
\" .
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
