.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2021 G. Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH close-port 3scm 2021-02-28 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
close-port \- close a port
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs io ports))" "            ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (scheme base))" "              ;R7RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(close-port " port )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Closes the port, rendering the port incapable of delivering
or accepting data. If
.I port
is an output port, it is flushed before being closed. This has no
effect if the port has already been closed. A closed port is still a
port.
.TP
.B R6RS
If
.I port
is a custom port then the closer procedure is called before the
port is really closed.
.
\" .SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
\" .
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns unspecified values.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(define p (open-output-file "hello.txt"))
(display "Hello, world\\n" p)
(close-port p)
.EE
.
.SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
.
Ports are often connected to some limited resource, such as a file
descriptor. Closing ports is important to avoid resource leaks. Some
implementations will garbage collect ports, but this is not required.
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
This procedure is new in R6RS and R7RS.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
.TP
R7RS
The assertions described above are errors.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR close-input-port (3scm),
.BR call-with-port (3scm)
.SH STANDARDS
R6RS,
R7RS
.
\" .SH HISTORY
\" .
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
.
.SH BUGS
.
It is often better to use
.BR call-with-port (3scm)
or one of the related procedures. They make it easier to ensure that a
port is closed when an exception is raised.
