.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright © 2022 Göran Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH condition 3scm 2022-05-14 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
condition \- compound conditions
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs conditions))" "          ;R6RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(condition " condition\fR1\fP " ...)"
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Returns a condition object with
the components of the
.IR condition s
as its components, in
the same order, i.e., with the components of
.IR condition 1
appearing first in the same order as in
.IR condition 1,
then with the components of
.IR condition 2,
and so on.
.PP
Compound conditions act as if they were any of the included simple
conditions with regard to predicates and accessors.
\" .
\" .SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
\" .
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single value; a condition. The returned condition is
compound if the total number of components is zero or greater than
one. Otherwise, it may be compound or simple.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(define con
  (condition
   (make-error)
   (make-message-condition "I am an error")))

(error? con)  =>  #t
(message? con)  =>  #t
(condition-message con)  =>  "I am an error"
.EE
.
.SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
.
Compound conditions are used when describing multiple aspects of
exceptional situations. They are passed to
.BR raise (3scm)
and
.BR raise-continuable (3scm).
They are normally caught with
.BR guard (7scm).
.
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
Compound conditions are unique to R6RS.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR simple-conditions (3scm)
.SH STANDARDS
R6RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
This procedure was first introduced in R6RS as part of the new
condition system.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
