.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2022 Gwen Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH cons* 3scm 2022-05-11 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
cons* \- cons up a chain of pairs
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs lists))" "               ;R6RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(cons* " obj1 " ... " objn " " obj )
.BI "(cons* " obj )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
If called with at least two arguments,
.B cons*
returns a freshly allocated chain of pairs whose cars are
\fIobj1\fR, ...,
.IR objn ,
and whose last cdr is
.IR obj .
If called with only one argument,
.B cons*
returns that argument.
.PP
This procedure is similar to
.BR list (3scm),
with the difference that the last argument (rather than the empty
list) becomes the cdr of last pair in the chain.
\" .
\" .SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
\" .
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single value, which is either
.I obj
itself or a chain of pairs.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(cons* 1 2 '(3 4 5))  =>  (1 2 3 4 5)
(cons* 1 2 3)         =>  (1 2 . 3)
(cons* 1)             =>  1
.EE
.
.SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
.
This procedure replaces constructs like \f[CB](apply list a b x*)\fP.
It is faster and handles the case where the last argument does not
need to be a list. Depending on the Scheme implementation, it may
also be used in the expansion of
.BR quasiquote (7scm)
for constructs like
\f[CB]`(,a ,b ,@x*)\fP.
.
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
This procedure is unique to R6RS.
.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed.
.TP
.BR &implementation-restriction " (R6RS)"
There is not enough free memory to hold the new pairs.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR list (3scm),
.BR cons (3scm)
.SH STANDARDS
R6RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
The first RnRS report to have this procedure was R6RS.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
