.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2020 G. Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH cons 3scm 2020-08-19 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
cons \- construct a pair
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs base))" "                ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (scheme r5rs))" "              ;R7RS"
.BR "(import (scheme base))" "              ;R7RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(cons " obj1 " " obj2 )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Returns a newly allocated pair whose
car is
.I obj1
and whose
cdr is
.IR obj2 .
The pair is guaranteed to be different (in the sense of eqv?) from
every existing object.
.
.SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
.
There is not a lot of room for differences between implementations
of
.BR cons .
The main difference will be in how fast a pair can be allocated
and how allocation affects the garbage collector.
.PP
It is possible for an implementation to return a pair that cannot be
changed (also known as an immutable pair), but this is not standard.
.
.TP
.B Racket
Pairs in Racket are immutable. This does not apply to its R6RS language.
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a new pair. If the cdr is a list then the return value is also
considered to be a list.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(cons 'a '())         =>  (a)
(cons '(a) '(b c d))  =>  ((a) b c d)
(cons "a" '(b c))     =>  ("a" b c)
(cons 'a 3)           =>  (a . 3)
(cons '(a b) 'c)      =>  ((a b) . c)
.EE
.
.SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
.
The
.B cons
procedure is used in programs that work with lists or other
structures that consist of pairs.
In many cases it can be better to process a list with procedures like
.BR map (3scm),
.BR filter (3scm),
.BR fold-left (3scm),
or one of the procedures from SRFI-1.
.PP
Larger structures can be created with
.BR quasiquote (3scm),
which lets the code resemble the structure it creates.
.SH RATIONALE
.
Pairs are a fundamental data structure.
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
The
.B cons
procedure appears in all Lisps.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed.
.TP
R7RS
The assertions described above are errors.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR set-car! (3scm),
.BR set-cdr! (3scm),
.BR pairs (7scm)
.SH STANDARDS
R4RS,
IEEE Scheme,
R5RS,
R6RS,
R7RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
The predecessor of
.B cons
was a subroutine \fBcons(a,d,p,t)\fP along with
.BR car ", " cdr ", " cpr ", and " ctr .
The modern
.B cons
came from Herbert Gelernter and Carl Gerberich at IBM during the
development of the FORTRAN List Processing Language
(History of Lisp, John McCarthy, 1979).
.PP
The Lisp in
MIT AI Memo No.\~1 (September 1958)
uses the four-argument
.BR cons .
The modern two-argument
.B cons
appears in
MIT AI Memo No.\~3.
.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
.
.SH BUGS
.
