.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2023 Gwen Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH current-input-port 3scm 2023-02-21 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
current-input-port, current-output-port, current-error-port \- get the current (default) ports
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs io ports))" "            ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs io simple))" "           ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (scheme r5rs))" "              ;R7RS"
.BR "(import (scheme base))" "              ;R7RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI (current-input-port)
.BI (current-output-port)
.BI (current-error-port)
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
These return default textual ports for regular input, output and error
output. Normally, these default ports are associated with standard
input, standard output, and standard error, respectively.
.PP
The return value of
.B current-input-port
and
.B current-output-port
can be dynamically re-assigned using
.BR with-input-from-file (3scm)
and
.BR with-output-to-file (3scm)
respectively.
.PP
A port returned by one of these procedures may or may not have an
associated transcoder; if it does, the transcoder is
implementation-dependent.
.TP
.B R7RS
These procedures are parameter objects, which can be overridden with
.BR parameterize (7scm).
.
.SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
.
Standard input, output and error ports are concepts in general purpose
operating systems. The implementation should hook these ports up to
whatever standard I/O mechanism is provided by the operating system,
if any.
.PP
The error port should usually be unbuffered so that no output is lost
if the program exits unexpectedly.
.
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
These procedures return a single value; a port.
.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(display "There was an error.\n" (current-error-port))
.EE
.
\" .SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
\" .
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
R7RS defines these procedures as parameters. They are likely to
internally be some form of parameters in all implementations, however,
because of how
.BR with-input-from-file (3scm),
etc, works. But one cannot expect to portably use them as parameters
outside of R7RS.
.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
.TP
R7RS
The assertions described above are errors.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR standard-input-port (3scm),
.BR parameterize (7scm),
.BR with-input-from-file (3scm)
.
.SH STANDARDS
R4RS,
IEEE Scheme,
R5RS,
R6RS,
R7RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
The
.B current-error-port
procedure first appeared in R6RS.
The other procedures are standard since R2RS.
.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
