.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright © 2021 Göran Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH delete-file 3scm 2021-03-07 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
delete-file \- delete a file
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs files))" "               ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (scheme file))" "              ;R7RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(delete-file " filename )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Deletes the named file if it exists and can be deleted.
.
\" .SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
\" .
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
.TP
.B R6RS
Returns unspecified values.
.TP
.B R7RS
Returns an unspecified value.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(call-with-output-file "temp.txt"
  (lambda (p)
    (display "Hello, temporary world!\\n" p)))

(delete-file "temp.txt")
.EE
.
.SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
.
This procedure is used to delete files. It is commonly used to remove
existing output files before writing new output files. In R6RS systems
this is handled without race conditions with (file-options no-fail),
see
.BR file-options (7scm).
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
.TP
.B R6RS
Valid values for a file name include strings that name a file using
the native notation of filesystem paths on an implementation’s
underlying operating system, and may include implementation-dependent
values as well.
.TP
.B R7RS
It is an error if filename is not a string. See the next section.
.PP
This procedure is absent from R5RS and earlier reports.
.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions that satisfy the following predicates.
.TP
.BR assertion-violation? " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
.TP
R7RS
The assertions described above are errors.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.TP
.BR i/o-filename-error? " (R6RS), " file-error? " (R7RS)"
The file does not exist or cannot be deleted.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR file-exists? (3scm),
.BR file-options (7scm)
.SH STANDARDS
R6RS,
R7RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
This procedure is new to R6RS and R7RS, but it existed previously in
early Scheme running on MacLISP as
.BR deletef .
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
.
.SH BUGS
.
If a program checks if a file exists using
.BR file-exists? (3scm)
before calling
.B delete-file
then another program may still have deleted the file before the second
call. It is better to wrap
.B delete-file
in
.BR guard (7scm).
Another approach is to use (file-options no-fail), see
.BR file-options (7scm).
