.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2023 Gwen Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH digit-value 3scm 2023-03-21 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
digit-value \- get the numeric value of a character
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (scheme char))" "              ;R7RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(digit-value " char )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
This procedure returns the numeric value of its argument if it is a
numeric digit or
.B #f
on any other character.
.
Numeric digits are those for which
.B char-numeric?
returns
.BR #t.
Only the numeric values 0 to 9 are supported; characters representing
other values are non-numeric.
.
\" .SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
\" .
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single value; an exact integer or
.BR #f .
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(digit-value #\\3)      =>  3
(digit-value #\\x0664)  =>  4    ;if supported
(digit-value #\\x0AE6)  =>  0    ;if supported
(digit-value #\\x0EA6)  =>  #f   ;if supported
.EE
\" .
\" .SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
\" .
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
Implementations are not required to support characters other than
ASCII (excluding \fB#\\null\fP). Therefore only the characters
\fB#\\0\fP to \fB#\\9\fP need to be supported. Even implementations
with full Unicode support may return
.B #f
for some characters that other implementations support, because the
Unicode standard changes over time.
.
.SH ERRORS
It is an error if the wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR string->number (3scm),
.BR char-general-category (3scm),
.BR char-numeric? (3scm)
.
.SH STANDARDS
R7RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
This procedure first appeared in R7RS.
.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
