.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2021 Gwen Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH eof-object 3scm 2021-03-04 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
eof-object \- return the end-of-file object
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs io ports))" "            ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs io simple))" "           ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (scheme base))" "              ;R7RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI (eof-object)
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Returns an end-of-file object.
.
\" .SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
\" .
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single value which is an end-of-file object.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(eof-object? (eof-object))
          => #t

(eqv? (eof-object) (eof-object))
          => #t    ;R6RS

(eq? (eof-object) (eof-object))
          => #t    ;R6RS
.EE
.
.SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
.
The end-of-file object is used generally to indicate an end-of-file
condition. It appears in I/O routines, it is often passed through in
parsers, and it is used in generators (e.g. SRFI 158).
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
Works the same anywhere that it's available. Programs written for
earlier reports would sometimes get access to the end-of-file object
by using tricks like reading from an empty file or string port.
.PP
R6RS has a single unique end-of-file object.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed.
.TP
R7RS
The assertions described above are errors.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR eof-object? (3scm)
.SH STANDARDS
R6RS,
R7RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
First appeared in R6RS and R7RS. Previous reports had
.BR eof-object? ,
but the end-of-file object was not necessarily disjoint from other
types.
.PP
Other languages take different approaches, such as having the read
function return an empty result, or having it return an error and
providing a function to test for the end-of-file condition.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
