.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2021 Gwen Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH filter 3scm 2021-03-03 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
filter, partition \- filter a list
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs lists))" "               ;R6RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(filter " proc " " list )
.BI "(partition " proc " " list )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fBfilter\fP procedure returns a list containing the elements in
\fIlist\fP for which \fIproc\fP returned a true value.
.PP
The \fBpartition\fP procedure is exactly like \fBfilter\fP, except it
also returns a second list containing the elements that were
eliminated by
.IR proc .
.PP
The elements of the returned lists are in the same order as they
appear in
.IR list .
The
.I proc
procedure is called in an unspecified order.
.PP
.I Proc
should accept one argument and return a single value.
.I Proc
should not mutate
.IR list .
.I Proc
is always called in the same dynamic
environment as
.B filter
or
.B partition
itself.
\" .
\" .SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
\" .
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
The \fBfilter\fP procedure returns a single list. The \fBpartition\fP
procedure returns two list.
.PP
If this procedure returns twice (e.g. by use of \fBcall/cc\fP) then
the lists returned earlier are not mutated.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(filter even? '(3 1 4 1 5 9 2 6))
           => (4 2 6)
(partition even? '(3 1 4 1 5 9 2 6))
           => (4 2 6) (3 1 1 5 9) ; two values
.EE
.
.SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
.
These procedures are common in functional code that works with lists.
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
These procedures are absent from reports other than R6RS. See SRFI-1
for alternatives.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside
its domain. Examples of this are a procedure \fIproc\fP that does not
accept and return a single value, or a \fIlist\fP which is circular or
improper.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR map (3scm),
.BR remp (3scm)
.SH STANDARDS
R6RS
.
\" .SH HISTORY
\" .
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
.
.SH BUGS
.
The procedure
.I proc
should avoid side-effects, because the order of calls is unspecified.
