.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2021 Gwen Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH fixnum? 3scm 2021-01-17 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
fixnum? \- test if an object is a fixnum
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs arithmetic fixnums))" "  ;R6RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(fixnum? " obj )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Returns \fB#t\fP if \fIobj\fP is an exact integer object within the
fixnum range, \fB#f\fP otherwise.
.SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
.
The fixnum range is implementation-dependent, see
.BR fixnum-width (3scm).
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single boolean object as per the description.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(fixnum? 0)            => #t
(fixnum? (expt 2 20))  => #t
(fixnum? #f)           => #f
(fixnum? "123")        => #f
(fixnum? (fx+ a 1))
    => #t or &implementation-restriction
.EE
.
\" .SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
\" .
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
\" .SH COMPATIBILITY
\" .
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
.TP
R7RS
The assertions described above are errors.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR fixnum-width (3scm)
.SH STANDARDS
R6RS
.
\" .SH HISTORY
\" .
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
