.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2023 G. Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH flush-output-port 3scm 2023-07-24 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
flush-output-port \- flush buffered data from a port to its sink
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs io ports))" "            ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (scheme base))" "              ;R7RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(flush-output-port " output-port )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Flushes any buffered output from the buffer of
.I output-port
to the underlying file, device, or object.
.
.SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
.
.TP
.B Vicare Scheme
The standard output port is block buffered and it is not closed on
exit. A manual flush is needed before exiting the program.
.
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
.TP
.B R6RS
Returns unspecified values.
.TP
.B R7RS
Returns an unspecified value.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(display "Enter your name: ")
(flush-output-port (current-output-port))
(define name (get-line (current-input-port)))
.EE
.
.SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
.
Used to manually flush a port's internal buffers. The port is
automatically flushed when the port is closed, so there is no need for
a manual flush before closing a port.
.
.SH RATIONALE
.
Output ports are line buffered, block buffered or unbuffered.
Buffering is typically good for performance, but sometimes
applications need to write data immediately.
.
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
.\" XXX: Is it specified if &i/o-encoding can happen this late?
.TP
.BR &i/o-encoding " (R6RS)"
The port's transcoder is in raise mode and it encountered an invalid
byte sequence.
.TP
.BR &i/o-write " (R6RS)"
There was an I/O error during the write operation.
.TP
.BR &i/o-port " (R6RS)"
This condition specifies the port object related to the
.B &i/o-write
condition.
.TP
R7RS
The assertions described above are errors.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR call-with-port (3scm),
.BR close-port (3scm)
.
.SH STANDARDS
R6RS,
R7RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
This procedure first appeared in R6RS as part of the reworked I/O system.
.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
