.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2023 G. Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH get-string-n! 3scm 2023-07-23 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
get-string-n! \- read characters into a string
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs io ports))" "            ;R6RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(get-string-n! " textual-port " " string " " start " " count )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Reads from
.I textual-input-port
in the same manner as
.IR get-string-n .
.PP
If
.I count
characters are available before an end of file, they
are written into
.I string
starting at index
.IR start ,
and
.I count
is returned.
.PP
If fewer characters are available before an end
of file, but one or more can be read, those characters are
written into
.I string
starting at index
.I start
and the number
of characters actually read is returned as an exact integer
object.
.PP
If no characters can be read before an end of file, the end-of-file
object is returned and
.\" This is not explicit in R6RS
the end-of-file condition is consumed.
.
\" .SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
\" .
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single value; an exact positive integer object, or
the end of file object.
.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(define s (make-string 10 #\\space))
(call-with-port (open-input-file "/etc/hostname")
  (lambda (p)
    (get-string-n! p s 0 10)))
   => 9
s => "darkstar\n "
.EE
.
.SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
.
Application usage is rare in practice.
\" .SH RATIONALE
.
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
This procedure is unique to R6RS.
.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
In particular,
.I start
and
.I count
must be exact, non-negative integer objects,
.I string
must be a string with at least
.IR start + count
characters.
.
.TP
.BR &i/o-read " (R6RS)"
A read error occurred during an I/O operation.
.
.TP
.BR &i/o-decoding " (R6RS)"
The
.I textual-input-port
is associated with a transcoder in the \[CR]raise\fP error
handling mode and a invalid byte sequence was encountered.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR get-string-n (3scm),
.BR get-bytevector-n (3scm)
.SH STANDARDS
R6RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
This procedure first appeared in R6RS as part of the reworked I/O system.
.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
