.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2023 Gwen Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH get-string-all 3scm 2023-07-23 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
get-string-all \- read characters up to the next end of file
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs io ports))" "            ;R6RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(get-string-all " textual-input-port )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Reads from textual-input-port until an end of file,
decoding characters in the same manner as
.BR get-string-n (3scm)
and
.BR get-string-n! (3scm).
.PP
If characters are available before the end of file, a string
containing all the characters decoded from that data are returned. If
no character precedes the end of file, the end-of-file object is
returned.
.
\" .SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
\" .
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single value; a string or the end-of-file object.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(call-with-port (open-input-file "/etc/hostname")
  (lambda (p)
    (get-string-all p)))
   => "darkstar\n"
.EE
.
\" .SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
\" .
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
This procedure is only present in R6RS.
.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
In particular,
.I textual-input-port
must be an open textual input port.
.
.TP
.BR &i/o-read " (R6RS)"
A read error occurred during an I/O operation.
.
.TP
.BR &i/o-decoding " (R6RS)"
The
.I textual-input-port
is associated with a transcoder in the \[CR]raise\fP error
handling mode and a invalid byte sequence was encountered.
.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR get-string-n (3scm),
.BR get-string-n! (3scm),
.BR get-bytevector-all (3scm)
.
.SH STANDARDS
R6RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
This procedure first appeared in R6RS as part of the reworked I/O system.
.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
