.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2023 Gwen Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH get-bytevector-all 3scm 2023-02-01 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
get-bytevector-all \- read bytes until the next end of file
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs io ports))" "            ;R6RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(get-bytevector-all " binary-input-port )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Reads all bytes until the next end of file, blocking as necessary.
.PP
If one or more bytes are read, returns a bytevector
containing all bytes up to the next end of file and updates
.I binary-input-port
to point just past these bytes.
.PP
If no bytes are read, returns the end-of-file object.
.PP
The operation may block indefinitely waiting to see if more
bytes will become available, even if some bytes are already
available.
.
\" .SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
\" .
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single value; a bytevector or the end-of-file object.
.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(call-with-port (open-file-input-port "/etc/machine-id")
  get-bytevector-all)
.EE
.
.SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
.
This procedure is a convenience that replaces a loop that is fiddly to
make efficient and correct.
.
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
This procedure is unique to R6RS.
.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
.TP
R7RS
The assertions described above are errors.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR get-bytevector-n (3scm),
.
.SH STANDARDS
R6RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
This procedure first appeared in the reworked I/O system in R6RS.
.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
