.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2023 Gwen Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH hashtable-ref 3scm 2023-01-22 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
hashtable-ref \- get a value from a hashtable
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs hashtables))" "          ;R6RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(hashtable-ref " hashtable " " key " " default )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Returns the value in
.I hashtable
associated with
.IR key .
If
.I hashtable
does not contain an association for
.IR key ,
.I default
is returned.
.
\" .SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
\" .
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single object; either a value from an association in
.I hashtable
or the object
.IR default .
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(define ht (make-eq-hashtable))
(hashtable-set! ht 'foo 'bar)
(hashtable-ref ht 'foo #f)   =>  bar
(hashtable-ref ht 'bar #f)   =>  #f
.EE
.
\" .SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
\" .
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
This procedure is unique to R6RS. Similar procedures exist in
SRFI-69 and SRFI-125.
.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
In particular,
.I hashtable
should be a hashtable and
.I key
should be in the domain of the hashtable's hash and equal functions.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR make-hashtable (3scm),
.BR hashtable-keys (3scm),
.BR hashtable-contains? (3scm)
.SH STANDARDS
R6RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
This procedure first appeared in R6RS. An equivalent procedure already
existed in SRFI-69 under the name
.BR hash-table-ref .
.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
.
.SH BUGS
.
The following code pattern does not work if the hashtable's
keys can be associated with the false object.
.PP
.EX
(cond ((hashtable-ref ht key #f) =>
       (lambda (value)
         (... do something with value ...)))
      (else
       ... assume key is not in ht ...))
.EE
.PP
Use
.BR hashtable-contains? (3scm)
to get around this problem.
