.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2023 Gwen Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH hashtable-size 3scm 2023-01-22 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
hashtable-size \- get the number of associations in a hashtable
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs hashtables))" "          ;R6RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(hashtable-size " hashtable )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Returns the number of keys contained in
.IR hashtable .
.
\" .SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
\" .
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single value; an exact non-negative integer object.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(map (lambda (n)
       (do ((ht (make-eqv-hashtable))
            (i 0 (+ i 1)))
           ((> i n)
            (hashtable-size ht))
         (do ((j 0 (+ j 1)))
             ((> j n))
           (hashtable-set! ht (* i j) #t))))
     '(0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13))
    => (1 2 4 7 10 15 19 26 31 37 43 54 60 73)
.EE
.
\" .SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
\" .
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
This procedure is unique to R6RS. Similar procedures exist in
SRFI-69 and SRFI-125.
.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
In particular,
.I hashtable
should be a hashtable.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR make-hashtable (3scm),
.BR hashtable-keys (3scm),
.BR hashtable-entries (3scm)
.SH STANDARDS
R6RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
This procedure first appeared in R6RS. An equivalent procedure already
existed in SRFI-69 under the name
.BR hash-table-size .
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
