.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright © 2023 Göran Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH hashtable-contains? 3scm 2023-01-121 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
hashtable-contains? \- check if a key exists in a hashtable
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs hashtables))" "          ;R6RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(hashtable-contains? " hashtable " " key )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Returns
.B #t
if
.I hashtable
contains an association for
.IR key ,
.B #f
otherwise.
.
\" .SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
\" .
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single value; a boolean object.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(let ((ht (make-eqv-hashtable)))
  (hashtable-set! ht (* 7 6) 'answer)
  (hashtable-contains? ht 42))
    => #t
.EE
.
.SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
.
This procedure provides a general for checking if hashtables contain
certain keys. If the hashtable never has associations with booleans
then another common solution is to use
.BR hashtable-ref (3scm)
with
.B #f
as the default value.
.
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
This procedure is unique to R6RS.
.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
.TP
R7RS
The assertions described above are errors.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR hashtable-ref (3scm)
.SH STANDARDS
R6RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
This procedure first appeared in R6RS. An equivalent procedure can be found
in SRFI-69 under the name hash-table-exists?.
.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
