.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2023 Gwen Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH hashtable-equivalence-function 3scm 2023-01-22 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
hashtable-equivalence-function, hashtable-hash-function, hashtable-mutable? \- hashtable inspection functions
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs hashtables))" "          ;R6RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(hashtable-equivalence-function " hashtable )
.BI "(hashtable-hash-function " hashtable )
.BI "(hashtable-mutable? " hashtable )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B hashtable-equivalence-function
procedure returns the equivalence function used by hashtable to
compare keys.
For hashtables created by
.BR make-eq-hashtable (3scm)
and
.BR make-eqv-hashtable (3scm),
this procedure returns the procedure objects
.B eq?
and
.BR eqv? ,
respectively.
.PP
The
.B hashtable-hash-function
procedure returns the hash function used by
.IR hashtable .
For hashtables created by
.BR make-eq-hashtable (3scm)
or
.BR make-eqv-hashtable (3scm),
.B #f
is returned.
.PP
The
.B hashtable-mutable?
procedure
returns
.B #t
if hashtable is mutable, otherwise
.BR #f .
.
\" .SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
\" .
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
These procedures return a single value; an object as described above.
\" .SH EXAMPLES
\" .
\" .EX
\" .EE
.
.SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
.
These procedures are rarely used outside of procedures that print
hashtables.
.
.SH RATIONALE
.
The hash functions for hashtables created by
.BR make-eq-hashtable (3scm)
or
.BR make-eqv-hashtable (3scm),
are private to the implementation. This is because implementations may
use garbage collectors that move objects and this movement can change
the hash value of affected objects.
.
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
These procedures are unique to R6RS. Compatible procedures can sorta
be found in SRFI-69, SRFI-125 and SRFI-126.
.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
In particular,
.I hashtable
should be a hashtable.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR make-hashtable (3scm)
.SH STANDARDS
R6RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
These procedures first appeared in R6RS's hashtable library, which was
based on SRFI-69, which also has the first two procedures.
.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
