.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright © 2023 Göran Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH list-sort 3scm 2023-01-25 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
list-sort, vector-sort \- stable sorting of lists and vectors
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs sorting))" "             ;R6RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(list-sort " proc " " list )
.BI "(vector-sort " proc " " vector )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.
These procedures perform a stable sort of
.I list
or
.I vector
in ascending
order according to
.IR proc .
.
The procedure
.I proc
should accept two elements and return a true value when its first
argument is strictly less than its second, and
.B #f
otherwise.
.
.TP
.B Time complexity
The sorting algorithm performs O(n lg n)
calls to
.I proc
where n is the length of
.I list
or
.IR vector .
.
.TP
.B Side effects
The procedure
.I proc
should not have any side effects.
.
The pairing of arguments and the sequencing of calls to
.I proc
are not specified.
.
The sorting algorithm does not modify
.I list
or
.IR vector .
.
.SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
.
Quicksort cannot be used because it has worse time complexity than
what is required. Heapsort cannot be used either because it is not
stable. Merge sort satisfies all requirements and can be used, but
it is not the only option.
.
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Both of these procedures return a single value.
The
.B list-sort
procedure returns a list, and
.B vector-sort
returns a vector.
.PP
The return value may be
.B eq?
to the argument when the argument is already sorted, and the list
returned by
.B list-sort
may share structure with a tail of the original list.
.PP
If multiple returns occur from
.B list-sort
or
.BR vector-sort ,
the return values returned by earlier returns are not mutated.
.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(list-sort < '(3 5 2 1))     =>  (1 2 3 5)
(vector-sort < '#(3 5 2 1))  =>  #(1 2 3 5)
.EE
.
\" .SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
\" .
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
These procedures are unique to R6RS. Alternatives are available in
SRFI-95 and SRFI-132.
.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
In particular,
.I proc
should accept two arguments, which are elements from
.I list
or
.IR vector ,
and return one value.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR vector-sort! (3scm)
.SH STANDARDS
R6RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
These procedures first appeared in R6RS.
.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
