.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2023 G. Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH list-ref 3scm 2023-01-29 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
list-ref \- access an element of a list
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs base))" "                ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (scheme r5rs))" "              ;R7RS"
.BR "(import (scheme base))" "              ;R7RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(list-ref " list " " k )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Returns the
.IR k th
element of
.IR list .
.TP
.B Circular lists
R7RS explicitly allows
.I list
to be circular. R6RS also allows this, while also limiting the
implementation to only checking that
.I list
is a chain of pairs whose length is at least
.I k
+ 1.
.
\" .SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
\" .
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single value; an object from the list.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(list-ref '(a b c d) 2)  =>  c
(list-ref '(a b c d)
          (exact (round 1.8)))
        =>  c

(define lst (list 'a 'b 'c 'd))
(set-cdr! (cdddr lst) lst)   ;lst is now circular
(list-ref lst 4)
        =>  a
.EE
.
\" .SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
\" .
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
Except for different error behavior, this procedure works the same
everywhere.
.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
In particular,
.I list
must be a list whose length is at least
.I k
+ 1,
and
.I k
must be an exact nonnegative integer.
.TP
R7RS
The assertions described above are errors.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR car (3scm),
.BR vector-ref (3scm),
.BR assoc (3scm)
.SH STANDARDS
R4RS,
IEEE Scheme,
R5RS,
R6RS,
R7RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
This procedure first appeared in R2RS.
.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
