.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2023 G. Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH list\-copy 3scm 2023-08-13 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
list\-copy \- copy a list
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (scheme base))" "              ;R7RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(list\-copy " obj )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Returns a newly allocated copy of the given obj if it is a list.
.
Only the pairs themselves are copied; the cars of the result are the
same (in the sense of
.BR eqv? (3scm))
as the cars of list.
.
If obj is an improper list, so is the result, and the final cdrs are
the same in the sense of
.BR eqv? (3scm).
.
An obj which is not a list is returned unchanged.
.
\" .SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
\" .
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single value
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(define a '(1 8 2 8))    ; a may be immutable
(define b (list\-copy a))
(set\-car! b 3)           ; b is mutable
b  =>  (3 8 2 8)
a  =>  (1 8 2 8)
.EE
.
\" .SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
\" .
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
This procedure is unique to R6RS. An alternative is to write
\f[CR](map values obj)\fP.
.
.SH ERRORS
It is an error if the wrong number of arguments
was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
It is an error if
.I obj
is a circular list.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR map (3scm),
.BR vector\-copy (3scm)
.
.SH STANDARDS
.
R7RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
This procedure is new in R7RS.
.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
