.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2023 Gwen Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH list-tail 3scm 2023-08-13 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
list\-tail \- skip elements of a list
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs base))" "                ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (scheme r5rs))" "              ;R7RS"
.BR "(import (scheme base))" "              ;R7RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(list\-tail " list " " k )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Returns the subchain of pairs of
.I list
obtained by omitting the first
.I k
elements.
.
.SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
.
Implementation responsibilities: The implementation must check that
.I list
is a chain of pairs whose length is at least
.IR k .
It should not check that it is a chain of pairs beyond this length.
.
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single value; a subchain of pairs from
.IR list .
.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(list\-tail \[aq](a b c d) 2)  =>  (c d)
.EE
.
\" .SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
\" .
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
Apart from error conditions, this procedure works the same everywhere.
.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
In particular,
.I list should
be a list of size at least
.IR k .
.TP
R7RS
The assertions described above are errors.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR list-ref (3scm),
.BR cdr (3scm)
.
.SH STANDARDS
R4RS,
IEEE Scheme,
R5RS,
R6RS,
R7RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
This procedure first appeared in R2RS.
.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
