.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2022 G. Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH list? 3scm 2022-03-23 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
list? \- check if an object is a list
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs base))" "                ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (scheme r5rs))" "              ;R7RS"
.BR "(import (scheme base))" "              ;R7RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(list? " obj )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Returns
.B #t
if
.I obj
is a list,
.B #f
otherwise. By definition, all lists are chains of pairs that have
finite length and are terminated by the empty list.
.
.SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
.
This procedure is expected to run in time linear to the number of
elements in the list. Implementations can be expected to use an
algorithm like Floyd's cycle-finding algorithm ("tortoise and hare"),
which handles the case of circular lists created with
.BR set-cdr! (3scm).
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a boolean object.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(list? '(a b c))  => #t

(list? '())       => #t

(list? '(a . b))  => #f

(let ((x (list 'a)))
  (set-cdr! x x)
  (list? x))      => #f
.EE
.
\" .SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
\" .
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
The
.B list?
procedure is identical in all revisions of the Scheme reports. IEEE
Scheme explicitly mentions the case of circular structures.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed.
.TP
R7RS
The assertions described above are errors.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR pair? (3scm)
.SH STANDARDS
R4RS,
IEEE Scheme,
R5RS,
R6RS,
R7RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
The
.B list?
procedure first appeared in R4RS.
\" .PP
\" The LISP 1.5 Programmers's Manual (ISBN 0 262 13011 4) notes that
\" "[c]ircular lists are ordinarily not permitted". A
\" .B listp
\" predicate is given in the definition of lists, and it arguably does
\" not terminate when the input is a circular list.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
.
.SH BUGS
.
A fairly common mistake is to call
.B list?
when destructuring an object, e.g. immediately before using
.BR car (3scm)
or
.BR cdr (3scm).
Use
.BR pair? (3scm)
instead.
