.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2023 G. Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH list 3scm 2023-03-26 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
list \- create a list from the arguments
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs base))" "                ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (scheme r5rs))" "              ;R7RS"
.BR "(import (scheme base))" "              ;R7RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(list " obj " ...)"
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Returns a newly allocated list of its arguments.
.
\" .SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
\" .
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single value; a list.
.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(list 'a (+ 3 4) 'c)  =>  (a 7 c)
(list)                =>  ()
.EE
.
\" .SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
\" .
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
Except for out of memory situations, this procedure works the same
everywhere.
.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &implementation-restriction " (R6RS)"
There is not enough free memory to hold the new pairs. (Not all
implementations raise this exception, the majority just crash.)
.TP
R7RS
Implementations may signal an error during out of memory
conditions, or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR cons* (3scm),
.BR vector (3scm)
.
.SH STANDARDS
R4RS,
IEEE Scheme,
R5RS,
R6RS,
R7RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
The
.B list
function first appeared in LISP 1.5 (1962).
.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
