.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2023 G. Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH lookahead-u8 3scm 2023-07-20 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
lookahead-u8, peek-u8 \- peek at the next byte from a port
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs io ports))" "            ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (scheme base))" "              ;R7RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(lookahead-u8 " binary-input-port ) "    \fR;R6RS\fP"
.BI "(peek-u8)                           \fR;R7RS\fP"
.BI "(peek-u8 " binary-input-port )  "         \fR;R7RS\fP"
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.\" R6
This procedure is like
.BR get-u8 (3scm),
but it does not update
.I binary-input-port
to point past the byte.
.PP
If an end of file is pending then it is also not removed.
.
\" .SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
\" .
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single value; an exact integer object or the
end of file object.
.TP
.B R7RS
There may be several end of file objects.
.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
; This is for R7RS. Use open-file-input-port for R6RS.
(import (scheme base) (scheme file))
(define p (open-binary-input-file "/etc/os-release"))
(peek-u8 p)  =>  80  ; P
(read-u8 p)  =>  80  ; P
(read-u8 p)  =>  82  ; R
(peek-u8 p)  =>  69  ; E
(peek-u8 p)  =>  69  ; E
(read-u8 p)  =>  69  ; E
(read-u8 p)  =>  84  ; T
(read-u8 p)  =>  84  ; T
(read-u8 p)  =>  89  ; Y
.EE
.
.SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
.
This procedure is used when parsing binary data and the parser is
written to use lookahead. This is common with handwritten parsers and
is generally used in modular parsers that call other parsers when they
see a certain byte.
.
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
Both one-argument versions of this procedure are compatible with each
other. However, some implementations of the R7RS procedure allow it to
be used on any type of port, which is not guaranteed to work in all
implementations.
.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
.TP
R7RS
The assertions described above are errors.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR get-u8 (3scm),
.BR lookahead-char (3scm)
.
.SH STANDARDS
R6RS,
R7RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
This procedure first appeared in R6RS as part of the reworked I/O
system.
.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
.
.SH BUGS
.
It is relatively easy to mistakenly have this procedure consume end of
file objects.
