.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2023 G. Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH magnitude 3scm 2023-03-14 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
magnitude, angle \- magnitude and angle of complex numbers
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs base))" "                ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (scheme r5rs))" "              ;R7RS"
.BR "(import (scheme complex))" "           ;R7RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(magnitude " z )
.BI "(angle " z )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Return the magnitude and angle of
.IR z ,
respectively.
.
.SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
.
Most implementations of complex numbers do not store them in polar
form but instead use rectangular form. The magnitude can be found
using the equation for Euclidean distance:
\f[CR](sqrt (+ (expt (real-part z) 2) (expt (imag-part z) 2)))\fP.
The angle can be found using atan:
\f[CR](atan (imag-part z) (real-part z))\fP.
.
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
These procedures return a single value; a real number.
.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(angle -1)       =>  3.141592653589793   ; approximately
(magnitude 1+i)  =>  1.4142135623730951  ; approximately

(angle -1.0+0.0i)
        =>  3.141592653589793   ; approximately
(angle -1.0-0.0i)
        =>  -3.141592653589793  ; approximately
        ; if -0.0 is distinguished

(angle +inf.0)  =>  0.0
(angle -inf.0)  =>  3.141592653589793  ; approximately

(angle 0)        =>  &assertion raised
(magnitude 0)    =>  0
.EE
.
\" .SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
\" .
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
These procedures work the same everywhere that they are supported.
R7RS implementations may not have support for complex numbers.
.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
.TP
R7RS
The assertions described above are errors.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR abs (3scm),
.BR make-rectangular (3scm)
.
.SH STANDARDS
R4RS,
IEEE Scheme,
R5RS,
R6RS,
R7RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
These procedures first appeared in R2RS, which used Common Lisp
as inspiration for its number system.
In Common Lisp these procedures are called
.B abs
and
.BR phase .
.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
