.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2023 Gwen Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH make-vector 3scm 2023-07-22 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
make-vector \- allocate a new vector
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs base))" "                ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (scheme r5rs))" "              ;R7RS"
.BR "(import (scheme base))" "              ;R7RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(make-vector " k )
.BI "(make-vector " k " " fill )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Returns a newly allocated vector of
.I k
elements. If a second
argument is given, then each element is initialized to
.IR fill .
Otherwise the initial contents of each element is unspecified.
.
.SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
.
Implementations vary in how well they handle a large
.I k
argument. Vectors typically need approximately four or eight
bytes per element and a large
.I k
means that the system can run out of memory. If this happens then some
implementations will crash while others raise
.BR &implementation-restriction .
.
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single value; a freshly allocated vector.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(make-vector 3 #f)  =>  #(#f #f #f)
.EE
.
\" .SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
\" .
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
This procedure works the same everywhere apart from error handling.
.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
.TP
R7RS
The assertions described above are errors.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR make-list (3scm),
.BR vector (3scm)
.
.SH STANDARDS
R4RS,
IEEE Scheme,
R5RS,
R6RS,
R7RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
This procedure first appeared in R2RS.
.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
