.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2022 G. Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH make-transcoder 3scm 2022-03-30 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
make-transcoder, transcoder-codec, transcoder-eol-style, transcoder-error-handling-mode \- port transcoders
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs io ports))" "            ;R6RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(make-transcoder " codec )
.BI "(make-transcoder " codec " " eol-style )
.BI "(make-transcoder " codec " " eol-style " " handling-mode )

.BI "(transcoder-codec " transcoder )
.BI "(transcoder-eol-style " transcoder )
.BI "(transcoder-error-handling-mode " transcoder )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Returns a transcoder with the behavior specified by the arguments.
.PP
.I Codec
must be a codec. The standard codecs are those returned by
.BR latin-1-codec ,
.BR utf-8-codec ,
and
.BR utf-16-codec .
.PP
.I Eol-style
is optional and must be an
.BR eol-style (3scm)
symbol:
.BR lf ,
.BR cr ,
.BR crlf ,
.BR nel ,
.BR crnel ,
or
.BR ls .
It defaults to the native end-of-line style of the underlying platform.
.PP
.I Handling-mode
is optional and must be an
.BR error-handling-mode (3scm)
symbol:
.BR ignore ,
.BR raise ,
or
.B replace
(default).
.
.SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
.
.TP
.B IronScheme
The native end-of-line style is
.BR crlf .
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single value which is a transcoder object.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
; Decodes a UTF-8-encoded string with ISO-8859-1.
; Note also how \\r\\n is read as a single newline.
(let* ((bv (string->utf8 "D\[:o]ner\\r\\nkebab"))
       (p (open-bytevector-input-port bv))
       (tc (make-transcoder (latin-1-codec)
                            (eol-style lf)))
       (tp (transcoded-port p tc)))
  (get-string-all tp))
        => "Döner\\nkebab"
.EE
.
.SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
.
This procedure is used in applications that need to control the binary
encoding of textual ports.
.SH RATIONALE
.
Transcoders let applications control parameters that would otherwise
be implicit.
.
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
Transcoders are unique to the R6RS I/O system.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR transcoded-port (3scm),
.BR port-transcoder (3scm),
.BR native-transcoder (3scm),
.BR native-eol-style (3scm)
.SH STANDARDS
R6RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
Port transcoders were introduced in R6RS.
.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
.
.SH BUGS
.
There is no
.B transcoder?
procedure in R6RS.
