.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2022 G. Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH make-bytevector 3scm 2022-03-21 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
make-bytevector \- create a new bytevector
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs bytevectors))" "         ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (scheme base))" "              ;R7RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(make-bytevector " k )
.BI "(make-bytevector " k " " fill )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Return a newly allocated bytevector of
.I k
bytes.
.PP
If the
.I fill
argument is missing, the initial contents of the returned bytevector
are unspecified.
.PP
If the
.I fill
argument is present, it must be an exact integer object. Every byte in
the returned bytevector will be set to this value.
.TP
.B R6RS
The
.I fill
argument must be in the range [−128, 255]. If
.I fill
is positive, it is interpreted as if passed to
.BR bytevector-u8-set! (3scm).
If it is negative, it is instead used as if passed to
.BR bytevector-s8-set! (3scm).
.TP
.B R7RS
The
.I fill
argument must be in the range [0, 255].
.
.SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
.
.TP
.B Chez Scheme, Loko Scheme, (others?)
If
.I k
is zero then the empty bytevector object is returned.
.TP
.B GNU Guile, Loko Scheme, (others?)
If
.I fill
is missing then the bytevector is initialized to zeros.
.TP
.B Chibi Scheme
Even though Chibi is an R7RS implementation, the
.I fill
argument is interpreted as in R6RS. This is a valid extension of R7RS.
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single object which is a bytevector object of the given
length. If
.I k
is non-zero then the bytevector is fresh. If
.I k
is zero then the unique empty bytevector object may be returned.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(make-bytevector 2 12)
    => #u8(12 12)          ;R7RS notation
.EE
.
.SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
.
This procedure is used in code that works with mutable bytevectors.
For some code an alternative is to use
.BR open-bytevector-output-port (3scm)
and to build the data sequentially.
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
Portable code should provide the second argument, and should keep it
in the range [0, 255].
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
.TP
.BR &implementation-restriction " (R6RS)"
There is not enough free memory to hold the new bytevector.
.TP
R7RS
The assertions described above are errors.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR u8-list->bytevector (3scm)
.SH STANDARDS
R6RS,
R7RS
.
\" .SH HISTORY
\" .
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
.
.SH BUGS
.
It is often a mistake to call this procedure without the
.I fill
argument. Unusual values of
.I k
can stress the Scheme implementation's memory allocator and cause a
crash.
