.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2022 Gwen Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH min 3scm 2022-03-26 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
max, min \- find the maximum or minimum argument
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs base))" "                ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (scheme r5rs))" "              ;R7RS"
.BR "(import (scheme base))" "              ;R7RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs arithmetic fixnums))" "  ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs arithmetic flonums))" "  ;R6RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(max " x1 " " x2 " ...)"
.BI "(fxmax " fx1 " " fx2 " ...)" "                 \fR;R6RS"
.BI "(flmax " fl1 " " fl2 " ...)" "                 \fR;R6RS"
.BI "(min " x1 " " x2 " ...)"
.BI "(fxmin " fx1 " " fx2 " ...)" "                 \fR;R6RS"
.BI "(flmin " fl1 " " fl2 " ...)" "                 \fR;R6RS"
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
These procedures return the maximum or minimum of their
arguments.
.TP
.B Generic versions
For any real number object x that is not a NaN:
.EX
(max +inf.0 x)  =>  +inf.0
(min -inf.0 x)  =>  -inf.0
.EE
If any argument is inexact, then the result is also inexact (unless
the procedure can prove that the inaccuracy is not large enough to
affect the result, which is possible only in unusual implementations).
.TP
.B Fixnum versions
The arguments and the return value are fixnums. There are no special
cases.
.TP
.B Flonum versions
The arguments are the return value are flonums. If one or more of the
arguments is a NaN then a NaN is returned.
.
\" .SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
\" .
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single number object.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(max 3 4)        =>  4
(max 3.9 4)      =>  4.0

(max 42 +nan.0)  => +nan.0
.EE
.
\" .SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
\" .
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
The generic versions of these procedures work the same in all Scheme
revisions.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
.TP
.BR &implementation-restriction " (R6RS)"
May be raised if
.B min
or
.B max
is used to compare number objects of mixed exactness, and the
numerical value of the result cannot be represented as an inexact
number object without loss of accuracy.
.TP
R7RS
The reasons for
.B &assertion
described above are errors.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
It is not specified how implementations should handle the
.B &implementation-restriction
case described above, but the program may be stopped.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR < (3scm)
.SH STANDARDS
R4RS,
IEEE Scheme,
R5RS,
R6RS,
R7RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
The generic versions of these procedures are in all Scheme reports
since R2RS. Early Scheme built on top of MacLISP also provided them.
.PP
The fixnum and flonum versions are new in R6RS.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
.
.SH BUGS
.
IEEE Scheme accidentally omitted
.BR min .
