.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2021 G. Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH native-endianness 3scm 2021-03-09 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
native-endianness \- return the native endianness
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs bytevectors))" "         ;R6RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI (native-endianness)
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
This procedure returns the native endianness of the system as a
symbol. The symbol is normally one of these:
.TP
.B big
Big endian. The more significant bytes come before the less significant bytes.
.TP
.B little
Little endian. The less significant bytes come before the more significant bytes.
.
\" .SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
\" .
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single symbol.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(native-endianness)
          => little
.EE
.
.SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
.
This procedure is sometimes used when interfacing with external
systems that use the native endianness to pass data.
.
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
This procedure exists in R6RS and is absent from R7RS-small. SRFI-74
has the native endianness as part of the
.BR endianness (7scm)
syntax.
.PP
Other endianness values may exist and they are in that case valid
arguments to the system's bytevector procedures.
.PP
Most systems today are little endian, but big endian hardware also
exists. Other endianness variants have died out.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR endianness (7scm),
.BR bytevector-u16-native-ref (3scm)
.SH STANDARDS
R6RS
.
\" .SH HISTORY
\" .
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
