.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright © 2022 Göran Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH newline 3scm 2022-05-07 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
newline \- write a newline to a port
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs io simple))" "           ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (scheme r5rs))" "              ;R7RS"
.BR "(import (scheme base))" "              ;R7RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI (newline)
.BI "(newline " textual-output-port )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Writes an end of line to
.IR textual-output-port ,
which defaults to the value returned by
.BR current-output-port (3scm).
.TP
.B R6RS
This is equivalent to using
.BR write-char (3scm)
to write
\f[CR]#\\linefeed\fP to
.IR textual-output-port .
.IP
The port transcoder's eol-style determines which characters will be
written to the port.
.IP
Ports with their buffer-mode set to \f[CR]line\fP will be be flushed
as a side-effect of calling this procedure.
.TP
.B R7RS
Exactly how a newline is produced, and which characters are used,
differs from one operating system to another.
.
\" .SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
\" .
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
.TP
.B R6RS
Returns unspecified values.
.TP
.B R7RS
Returns an unspecified value.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(display "Hello, world!")
(newline)
.EE
.
.SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
.
In R6RS programs this procedure may be used instead of \\n in a string
or instead of writing #\\linefeed. In R7RS programs this procedure
writes the characters that would have been selected for a newline by using a
transcoder with
.BR native-eol-style (3scm)
in R6RS.
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
This procedure has had the same basic functionality since R2RS. In
R6RS implementations it is possible to control the eol-style.
.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
.TP
R7RS
The assertions described above are errors.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR get-line (3scm),
.BR put-char (3scm)
.SH STANDARDS
R4RS,
IEEE Scheme,
R5RS,
R6RS,
R7RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
First appeared in R2RS. Scheme running on top of MacLisp has access to
the same functionality through the
.B terpri
(TERminate PRInt line) function, which was also in LISP 1.5.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
