.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright © 2023 Göran Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH numerator 3scm 2023-02-09 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
numerator, denominator, flnumerator, fldenominator \- compute numerator and denominator
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs base))" "                ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (scheme r5rs))" "              ;R7RS"
.BR "(import (scheme base))" "              ;R7RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs arithmetic flonums))" "  ;R6RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(denominator " q )
.BI "(numerator " q )
.BI "(fldenominator " fl )
.BI "(flnumerator " fl )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
These procedures return the numerator or denominator of their
argument.
.PP
The result is computed as if the argument was represented as a
fraction in lowest terms. The denominator is always positive. The
denominator of 0 is defined to be 1.
.
\" .SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
\" .
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single value; an integer with the same exactness as the
argument.
.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(numerator (/ 6 4))    =>  3
(denominator (/ 6 4))  =>  2
(denominator
  (inexact (/ 6 4)))   =>  2.0
(numerator 5)          =>  5
(denominator 5)        =>  1
.EE
.
\" .SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
\" .
.SH RATIONALE
.
These procedures, or their equivalents, are used internally in many
arithmetic procedures. Since they must exist somewhere in the
implementation it makes sense to provide them to the user.
.
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
These procedures work the same everywhere, except that R7RS
implementations are allowed to not support all types of numbers.
.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
In particular,
.I q
must be a rational number and
.I fl
must be a flonum object.
.TP
R7RS
The assertions described above are errors.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR rationalize (3scm),
.BR real-part (3scm),
.BR gcd (3scm),
.BR div-and-mod (3scm)
.
.SH STANDARDS
R4RS,
IEEE Scheme,
R5RS,
R6RS,
R7RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
These procedures first appeared in R3RS.
The flonum variants are new to R6RS's flonum library.
.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
