.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2023 Gwen Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH open-binary-input-file 3scm 2023-02-20 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
open-binary-input-file, open-binary-output-file \- open a binary file
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (scheme file))" "              ;R7RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(open-binary-input-file " string )
.BI "(open-binary-output-file " string )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Takes a
.I string
for a filename and returns a binary input or output port respectively.
.PP
When opening a file for input it must already exist. If the file
already exists when opening it for output the effect is unspecified.
.
\" .SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
\" .
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Both procedures return a single value; a fresh binary input or output port.
\" .SH EXAMPLES
\" .
\" .EX
\" .EE
\" .
\" .SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
\" .
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
These procedures are unique to R7RS. The
.BR open-file-input-port (3scm)
and
.BR open-file-output-port (3scm)
procedures are compatible replacements with stricter specifications.
.
.SH ERRORS
These procedure can raise exceptions satisfying the following predicates:
.TP
.BR file-error? " (R7RS)"
Raised if the file cannot be opened. In particular, this is raised by
.B open-binary-input-file
if the file does not exist.
.TP
R7RS
It is an error if the wrong number of arguments was passed
or an argument was outside its domain.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR open-file-input-port (3scm),
.BR file-error? (3scm)
.
.SH STANDARDS
.
R7RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
These procedures first appeared in R7RS.
.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
.
.SH BUGS
.
You should be aware of what your implementation does when the file
already exists because there is no way to check for this condition
before attempting to open a file. The text in R7RS explicitly says
that
.B "the effect is unspecified"
when this happens.
.PP
You cannot check for this condition ahead of time using
.BR file-exists? (3scm)
and
.BR delete-file (3scm)
because they are prone to time-to-check to time-of-use (TTCTOU) bugs.
.PP
If this is a concern then
.BR open-file-output-port (3scm)
can be used instead with appropriate options.
