.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2022 Gwen Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH put-u8 3scm 2022-04-07 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
put-u8, write-u8 \- write a byte to a binary output port
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs io ports))" "            ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (scheme base))" "              ;R7RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(put-u8 " binary-output-port " " byte ) "    \fR;R6RS"
.BI "(write-u8 " byte ) "                     \fR;R7RS"
.BI "(write-u8 " byte " " binary-output-port ) "  \fR;R7RS"
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Writes the
.I byte
to the given
.IR binary-output-port.
.
.SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
.
.TP
.B Chibi Scheme
The
.BR current-output-port (3scm)
at program start is both textual and binary.
It should normally not be possible to use
.B write-u8
on the current output port before rebinding it to a binary output
port (which is not possible in R6RS).
.
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
.TP
.B R6RS
Returns unspecified values.
.TP
.B R7RS
Returns a unspecified value.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
;; R7RS code to create a file with the single line "A"
(call-with-port (open-output-file "test.txt")
 (lambda (p)
   (write-u8 65 p)
   (write-u8 10 p)))
.EE
.
.SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
.
Commonly used in applications that create binary files or other binary data.
There is often a mix of single bytes intermixed with larger writes with
.BR put-bytevector (3scm).
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
\" .SH COMPATIBILITY
\" .
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
In particular,
.I byte
must be an exact integer between 0 and 255.
.TP
R7RS
The assertions described above are errors.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR put-char (3scm),
.BR put-bytevector (3scm)
.SH STANDARDS
R6RS,
R7RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
The
.B put-u8
procedure is new to the reworked I/O system introduced with R6RS.
The
.B write-u8
procedure is new in R7RS and is similar to
.BR write-char (3scm)
but works with binary output ports, which did not exist in R5RS.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
