.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2022 Gwen Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH put-string 3scm 2022-05-23 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
put-string, write-string \- write a string to a textual output port
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs io ports))" "            ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (scheme base))" "              ;R7RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
; R6RS only:
.BI "(put-string " textual-output-port " " string )
.BI "(put-string " textual-output-port " " string " " start )
.BI "(put-string " textual-output-port " " string " " start " " count )

; R7RS only:
.BI "(write-string " string )
.BI "(write-string " string " " textual-output-port )
.BI "(write-string " string " " textual-output-port " " start )
.BI "(write-string " string " " textual-output-port " " start " " end )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Writes the
characters of
.I string
starting at index
.I start
to
.IR textual-output-port .
.TP
.B R6RS
Exactly
.I count
characters are written,
defaulting to
\f[CR](string-length \fIstring\fP) − \fIstart\fP\fR.
.
.TP
.B R7RS
The characters from
.I start
to
.I end
are written,
with
.I end
defaulting to
\f[CR](string-length \fIstring\fP)\fR.
.
.PP
The
.I start
argument defaults to 0.
.
.
\" .SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
\" .
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
.TP
.B R6RS
Returns unspecified values.
.TP
.B R7RS
Returns an unspecified value.
.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(write-string "Hello, world!\\n")
.EE
.
.SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
.
This procedure is used, instead of a generic procedure like
.BR display (scheme),
because it is slightly faster and makes it possible to write only part
of the string.
.SH RATIONALE
.
The R7RS variant specifies
.I end
instead of
.I count
to be consistent with other procedures.
\" .SH COMPATIBILITY
\" .
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
In particular,
.I start
and
.I count
must be non-negative exact integer objects,
and
.I string
must have a length of at least
.I start
+
.IR count .
.
.TP
R7RS
The assertions described above are errors.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR put-char (3scm),
.BR display (3scm),
.BR open-file-output-port (3scm)
.SH STANDARDS
\" R4RS,
\" IEEE Scheme,
\" R5RS,
R6RS,
R7RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
The
.B put-string
procedure was introduced in R6RS as part of the reworked I/O design.
The
.B write-string
procedure is new in R7RS.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
