.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright © 2022
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH real-part 3scm 2022-04-07 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
real-part, imag-part \- real and imaginary parts of a complex number
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs base))" "                ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (scheme r5rs))" "              ;R7RS"
.BR "(import (scheme complex))" "           ;R7RS, optional library"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(real-part " z )
.BI "(imag-part " z )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
If \fIz\fP is the complex number \fIa+bi\fP, then the
.B real-part
procedure returns
.I a
and
.B imag-part
returns
.IR b .
.
.SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
.
See the notes in
.BR make-rectangular (3scm).
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
These procedures return a single value, a real number.
.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(real-part 1.1+2.2i)  =>  1.1   ;approximately

(imag-part 1.1+2.2i)  =>  2.2   ;approximately

(real-part -2+3i)  =>  -2  or  -2.0

(imag-part -2+3i)  =>  3  or  3.0

(imag-part 42)  =>  0  or  0.0
.EE
.
\" .SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
\" .
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
All R6RS implementations support complex numbers. Implementations of
the other RnRS reports may or may not support complex numbers. In such
cases these procedures will be missing.
.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
.TP
R7RS
The assertions described above are errors.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR make-rectangular (3scm),
.BR angle (3scm)
.SH STANDARDS
R4RS,
IEEE Scheme,
R5RS,
R6RS,
R7RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
These procedures first appeared in R2RS, which got them from Common Lisp,
where they are called
.B realpart
and
.BR imagpart .
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
