.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2023 Gwen Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH record-predicate 3scm 2023-08-05 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
record-predicate \- create record predicates
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs records procedural))" "  ;R6RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(record-predicate " rtd )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Returns a procedure that, given an object
.IR obj ,
returns \f[CR]#t\fP if
.I obj
is a record of the type represented by
.IR rtd ,
and \f[CR]#f\fP otherwise.
.
\" .SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
\" .
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single value; a procedure.
.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(define rtd-user
  (make-record-type-descriptor
    'user #f #f #f #f
    '#((immutable login) (immutable realname))))
(define rcd-user
  (make-record-constructor-descriptor
    rtd-user #f
    (lambda (p)
      (lambda (login realname)
        (p login realname)))))
(define make-user (record-constructor rcd-user))
(define user? (record-predicate rtd-user))

(define lain (make-user 'lain "Lain Iwakura"))
(user? lain)  =>  #t
.EE
.
.SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
.
These procedures are used together with the procedural record layer.
.
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
This procedure is unique to the R6RS record system. An equivalent
procedure can be found in SRFI-237.
.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
In particular,
.I rtd
must be a record-type descriptor.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR record-accessor (3scm),
.BR make-record-type-descriptor (3scm),
.BR define-record-type (7scm)
.
.SH STANDARDS
R6RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
First appeared in R6RS as part of the new record system.
.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
