.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2023 G. Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH record-rtd 3scm 2023-08-15 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
record-rtd \- get the rtd for the type of a record
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs records inspection))" "  ;R6RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(record-rtd " record )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Returns the rtd representing the type of
.I record
if the type is not opaque.
.PP
The rtd of the most precise type is returned;
that is, the type
.I t
such that record is of type
.I t
but not of
any type that extends
.IR t .
.PP
.
.SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
.
Most R6RS implementations define enumerations in terms of records.
.
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single value; an rtd.
.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(define rtd-user
  (make-record-type-descriptor
    'user #f #f #f #f
    '#((immutable login) (immutable realname))))
(define rcd-user
  (make-record-constructor-descriptor
    rtd-user #f
    (lambda (p)
      (lambda (login realname)
        (p login realname)))))
(define make-user (record-constructor rcd-user))

(define lain (make-user 'lain "Lain Iwakura"))

(eqv? (record-rtd lain) rtd-user)  =>  #t
.EE
.
.SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
.
This procedure is an important part of the record inspection
functionality and can be used to implement record printers, pattern
matchers with record support, and other functionality that requires
information about record types.
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
This procedure is unique to the R6RS record system. An equivalent
procedure can be found in SRFI-237.
.PP
Implementations often use records to define new types, even types that
are not required to use records for their internal representation.
There is generally no guarantee that you can use
.B record-rtd
on these types and doing so is not portable.
.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside
its domain. In particular,
.I record
must be a record.
.
Also raised if the type of
.I record
is opaque.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR define-record-type (7scm),
.BR make-record-type-descriptor (3scm)
.
.SH STANDARDS
R6RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
This procedure first appeared in R6RS as part of the record system.
.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
