.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2022 G. Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH remq 3scm 2022-05-07 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
remq, remv, remove, remp \- remove elements from a list
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs lists))" "               ;R6RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(remq " obj " " list )
.BI "(remv " obj " " list )
.BI "(remove " obj " " list )
.BI "(remp " proc " " list )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Each of these procedures returns a list of the elements of
.I list
that do not satisfy a given condition.
.PP
The
.B remp
procedure applies
.I proc
to each element of list and returns a
list of the elements of list for which
.I proc
returned
.BR #f .
The other procedures return a list of the elements that are not
.IR obj .
.PP
The
.B remq
procedure uses
.BR eq? (3scm)
to compare
.I obj
with the elements of list,
while
.B remv
uses
.BR eqv? (3scm)
and
.B remove
uses
.BR equal? (3scm).
.PP
The elements of the result list are in the same order as they appear
in the input list. If multiple returns occur, the return values
returned by earlier returns are not mutated.
.
.PP
.I Proc
should accept one argument and return a single value.
.
.I Proc
should not mutate
.IR list .
.
.I Proc
is always called in the same dynamic environment as this procedure
itself.
.
.SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
.
The implementation must check the restrictions on
.I proc
to the extent performed by applying it as described above. An
implementation may check whether
.I proc
is an appropriate argument before applying it.
.
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
These procedures return a single value; a list.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(remp even? '(3 1 4 1 5 9 2 6 5))
        =>  (3 1 1 5 9 5)

(remove 1 '(3 1 4 1 5 9 2 6 5))
        =>  (3 4 5 9 2 6 5)

(remv 1 '(3 1 4 1 5 9 2 6 5))
        =>  (3 4 5 9 2 6 5)

(remq 'foo '(bar foo baz))
        =>  (bar baz)
.EE
.
\" .SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
\" .
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
These procedures are unique to R6RS.
.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR filter (3scm)
.SH STANDARDS
R6RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
These procedures first appeared in R6RS.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
