.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2023 G. Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH standard-input-port 3scm 2023-02-20 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
standard-input-port, standard-output-port, standard-error-port \- fresh standard I/O ports
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs io ports))" "            ;R6RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI (standard-input-port)
.BI (standard-output-port)
.BI (standard-error-port)
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Returns a fresh binary port connected to standard input, standard
output or standard error respectively. The first returns an input port
and the latter two return output ports.
.PP
Whether the port supports the
.BR port-position (3scm)
and
.BR set-port-position! (3scm)
operations is implementation-dependent.
.
\" .SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
\" .
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single value; a fresh port.
.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
The following program converts its standard input from ISO-8859-1 to
UTF-8 on its standard output.
.PP
.EX
(import (rnrs))

(call-with-port
    (transcoded-port (standard-input-port)
                     (make-transcoder (latin-1-codec)))
  (lambda (inp)
    (call-with-port
        (transcoded-port (standard-output-port)
                         (make-transcoder (utf-8-codec)))
      (lambda (outp)
        (let lp ()
          (let ((c (get-char inp)))
            (unless (eof-object? c)
              (put-char outp c)
              (lp))))))))
.EE
.
.SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
.
This is used in application that need binary I/O on the standard
input, output and error. It can also be used to create transcoded
ports for when the default transcoder on
.BR current-input-port (3scm)
etc is not desired.
.
.SH RATIONALE
.
These procedures make it possible to do binary I/O on standard input,
output and error.
.
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
These procedures are unique to R6RS. There is nothing similar in R7RS
but some implementations will, as an extension, allow binary I/O on
textual ports. Chibi-Scheme is an example of such an implementation.
.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR current-input-port (3scm),
.BR make-transcoder (3scm)
.
.SH STANDARDS
R6RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
These procedures are new to the reworked I/O in R6RS.
.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
.
.SH BUGS
.
Programs should use
.BR flush-output-port (3scm)
or
.BR close-port (3scm)
on these ports before exiting, or use
.BR call-with-port (3scm).
The ports can be buffered and not all
implementations flush open ports at exit.
