.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2022 Gwen Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH string-append 3scm 2022-05-12 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
string-append \- append strings
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs base))" "                ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (scheme r5rs))" "              ;R7RS"
.BR "(import (scheme base))" "              ;R7RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(string-append " string " ...)"
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Returns a newly allocated string whose characters form the
concatenation of the given strings.
.
.SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
.
Some implementations have a single empty string object; see
.BR make-string (3scm).
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single value; a string.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(string-append "Hello," " " "world!")  =>  "Hello, world!"
(string-append)                        =>  ""
.EE
.
.SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
.
Applications should not use this in a loop to accumulate output.
Use
.BR open-string-output-port (3scm)
instead.
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
This procedure works the same in all RnRS revisions. The only
difference between implementations is whether the empty string is
newly allocated or not (see above).
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
An argument was outside its domain.
.TP
R7RS
The assertions described above are errors.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR append (3scm),
.BR open-string-output-port (3scm)
.SH STANDARDS
R4RS,
IEEE Scheme,
R5RS,
R6RS,
R7RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
This procedure first appeared in R2RS.
.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
