.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2022 Gwen Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH string-hash 3scm 2022-05-12 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
string-hash, string-ci-hash \- string hash functions
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs hashtables))" "          ;R6RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(string-hash " string )
.BI "(string-ci-hash " string )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Returns an integer hash value for
.IR string ,
based on its current
contents. It is used with
.BR make-hashtable (3scm).
.
.TP
.B string-hash
This hash function is suitable for use with
.BR string=? (3scm) as an equivalence
function.
.
.TP
.B string-ci-hash
This hash function ignores case. It is suitable for use with
.BR string-ci=? (3scm)
as an equivalence function.
.
.
\" .SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
\" .
.
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single value; an integer.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(= (string-hash "Quux") (string-hash "Quux"))     =>  #t
(= (string-ci-hash "quux") (string-hash "QUUX"))  =>  #t
(= (string-hash "foo") (string-hash "bar"))       =>  #t or #f
.EE
.
.SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
.
This procedure is used as an argument to
.BR make-hashtable (3scm).
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
\" .SH COMPATIBILITY
\" .
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR make-hashtable (3scm)
.SH STANDARDS
R6RS,
SRFI-69
.
.SH HISTORY
.
The first Scheme report to include this procedure was R6RS for its new
hashtable library. There is a similar procedure in SRFI-69.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
