.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright © 2022 Göran Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH string-ref 3scm 2022-04-04 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
string-ref \- get a character from a string
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs base))" "                ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (scheme r5rs))" "              ;R7RS"
.BR "(import (scheme base))" "              ;R7RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(string-ref " string " " k )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Returns character
.I k
of
.I string
using zero-origin indexing.
.TP
.B R6RS
Implementors should make
.B string-ref
run in constant time.
.TP
.B R7RS
There is no requirement for this procedure to execute in constant
time.
.
.SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
.
.TP
.B Chibi Scheme
Chibi supports O(1) string access if the
\f[CR]SEXP_USE_STRING_INDEX_TABLE\fR
feature is enabled.
.
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single value which is a character object. It is
.BR eqv? (3scm)
to the one that was last placed in the string at index
.IR k .
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(string-ref "abc" 1)  =>  #\\b
.EE
.
.SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
.
This procedure is used to implement algorithms that read strings in
non-linear access patterns. Programs that read strings at increasing
indices can use
.BR open-string-input-port (3scm)
instead.
.
.SH RATIONALE
.
The choice of R7RS to not require execution in constant time opens the
possibility for implementations to use UTF-8 or UTF-16 as the internal
string representation.
.
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
This procedure is functionally the same in all RnRS revisions after
R2RS. The differences are in which characters an implementation can
represent, how errors are signalled, and the time complexity of doing
the lookup.
.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
Raised if
.I k
is not a valid index of
.IR string .
.TP
R7RS
The assertions described above are errors.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR string-set! (3scm),
.BR vector-ref (3scm),
.BR open-string-input-port (3scm)
.SH STANDARDS
R4RS,
IEEE Scheme,
R5RS,
R6RS,
R7RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
First introduced in R2RS. Scheme before R2RS running on MacLISP had a
similar
.B getchar
function, but it used one-origin indexing and worked on atomic symbols
instead of character strings.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
.
.SH BUGS
.
It is easy to get the index validity check wrong.
GNU Guile 3.0.8 segfaults on evaluating \f[CR](string-ref "" -1)\fR.
