.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2022 G. Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH string->symbol 3scm 2022-05-13 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
string->symbol \- string to symbol conversion
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs base))" "                ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (scheme r5rs))" "              ;R7RS"
.BR "(import (scheme base))" "              ;R7RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(string->symbol " string )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Returns the symbol whose name is
.IR string .
.PP
This procedure can create symbols that cannot be read back with
.BR read (3scm)
after being written with
.BR write (3scm).
In R6RS implementations this happens when
.I string
is the empty string, because there is no lexical syntax for the symbol
with the empty name. (In R7RS the empty symbol is written as
\f[CR]||\fP).
.
.\" R7RS has this weirdly phrased remark:
.\" This procedure can create symbols with names containing special
.\" characters that would require escaping when written, but does not
.\" interpret escapes in its input.
.
.
\" .SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
\" .
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single value; a symbol.
.
.SH EXAMPLES
In the examples below the behavior would change if a case-folding
reader was used. This may be enabled with the \f[CR]#!fold-case\fP
directive. In R6RS this directive appears in the non-normative
appendix. In R5RS and earlier reports it was possible for case
conversion, either to upper or lower case, to be enabled by default.
.PP
.EX
(eq? 'mISSISSIppi 'mississippi)
    => #f
(string->symbol "mISSISSIppi")
    => the symbol with name "mISSISSIppi"
(eq? 'bitBlt (string->symbol "bitBlt"))
    => #t

(eq? 'JollyWog
     (string->symbol
      (symbol->string 'JollyWog)))
    => #t

(string=? "K. Harper, M.D."
          (symbol->string
           (string->symbol "K. Harper, M.D.")))
    => #t
.EE
.
\" .SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
\" .
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
This procedure is in all Scheme reports starting with R2RS.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
.TP
R7RS
The assertions described above are errors.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR symbol->string (3scm)
.SH STANDARDS
R4RS,
IEEE Scheme,
R5RS,
R6RS,
R7RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
This procedure first appeared with this name in R2RS. Earlier Scheme
running on MacLisp had the
.B getpname
procedure that returned an atomic symbol's print name as a character
string.
.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
.
.SH BUGS
.
There are implementations that do not garbage collect the symbol
interning table.
