.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2022 Gwen Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH string->vector 3scm 2022-05-14 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
string->vector \- convert a string to a vector
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (scheme base))" "              ;R7RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(string->vector " string )
.BI "(string->vector " string " " start )
.BI "(string->vector " string " " start " " end )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Returns a newly created vector initialized to the elements
of
.I string
between
.I start
(inclusive) and
.I end
(exclusive).
The order of the characters is preserved.
If omitted,
.I start
defaults to 0 and
.I end
defaults to the length of
.IR string .
.
\" .SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
\" .
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single value; a vector object.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(string->vector "ABC")  =>  #(#\\A #\\B #\\C)
.EE
.
\" .SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
\" .
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
\" .SH COMPATIBILITY
\" .
.SH ERRORS
It is an error to pass the wrong number of arguments,
and to pass an argument that is outside its domain.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR string->list (3scm)
.SH STANDARDS
R7RS,
SRFI-133,
SRFI-140,
SRFI-152
.
.SH HISTORY
.
This procedure first appeared in R7RS.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
