.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2022 Gwen Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH string-map 3scm 2022-03-29 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
string-map \- map a procedure over the characters in strings
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (scheme base))" "              ;R7RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(string-map " proc " " string1 " " string2 " ...)"
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B string-map
procedure applies
.I proc
element-wise to the elements of the strings and returns a string of
the results, in order.
.PP
If more than one string is given and not all strings have the same
length,
.B string-map
terminates when the shortest string runs out.
.PP
The dynamic order in which
.I proc
is applied to the elements of the strings is unspecified.
.PP
If multiple returns occur from
.BR string-map ,
the values returned by earlier returns are not mutated.
.
\" .SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
\" .
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single string object.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(string-map char-foldcase "AbdEgH")
        => "abdegh"

(string-map
 (lambda (c)
   (integer->char (+ 1 (char->integer c))))
 "HAL")
        => "IBM"

; Demonstrates how it ends on the shortest string
(string-map
 (lambda (c k)
   ((if (eqv? k #\u) char-upcase char-downcase)
    c))
 "studlycaps xxx"
 "ululululul")
        => "StUdLyCaPs"
.EE
.
\" .SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
\" .
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
\" .SH COMPATIBILITY
\" .
.SH ERRORS
It is an error if
.I proc
does not accept as many arguments as there
are strings or does not return a single character.
It is likewise an error if there are fewer than
two arguments or if one of the arguments is outside its domain.
.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR map (3scm)
.SH STANDARDS
R7RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
This procedure also appears in SRFI-13.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
