.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2022 Gwen Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH string 3scm 2022-04-13 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
string \- construct a string from the supplied characters
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs base))" "                ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (scheme r5rs))" "              ;R7RS"
.BR "(import (scheme base))" "              ;R7RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(string " char " ...)"
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Returns a newly allocated string composed of the arguments.
.
.SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
.
Some implementations have a single empty string object. See
.BR make-string (3scm).
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single value; a string.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(string #\\Q #\\u #\\u #\\x)  =>  "Quux"
.EE
.
.SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
.
This procedure is mostly used when building quite small strings. It's
one way to convert a character to a string.
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
This procedure works the same since R4RS, notwithstanding the limits
on strings that an implementation may have.
.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
An argument was not a character.
.
.TP
Unsupported characters (R7RS)
.
It is an error to pass this procedure a character which the
implementation does not support. 7-bit ASCII (except \fB#\\null\fR)
must be supported. Any other character is optional and potentially an
error. You can use the
.B full-unicode
feature identifier in
.BR cond-expand (7scm)
to check if all of Unicode 6.0 is supported.
.
.TP
R7RS
The assertions described above are errors.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR make-string (3scm),
.BR open-string-output-port (3scm)
.SH STANDARDS
R4RS,
IEEE Scheme,
R5RS,
R6RS,
R7RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
First appeared in R4RS.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
