.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2021 G. Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH string-length 3scm 2021-01-03 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
string-length \- the length of a string
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs base))" "                ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (scheme r5rs))" "              ;R7RS"
.BR "(import (scheme base))" "              ;R7RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(string-length " string )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Returns, as an exact integer object, the number of elements in
\fIstring\fP. The length of a string is fixed.
.
.SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
.
All extant implementations use fixnums to represent string lengths,
but this is not required.
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single value which is the length of the string.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(string-length "ABC")
          => 3
.EE
.
.SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
.
The \fBstring-length\fP procedure often appears in code that decodes
or encodes data in some protocol or file format or that formats or
parses strings. Sometimes an alternative is to use higher-order
procedures (\fBstring-for-each\fP(3scm),
.BR string-map (3scm))
or string ports
(\fBopen-input-string\fP(3scm),
.BR open-output-string (3scm)).
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
Apart from error handling, this procedure is the same in all Scheme
reports.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
.TP
R7RS
The assertions described above are errors.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR make-string (3scm),
.BR string-ref (3scm),
.BR string-for-each (3scm),
.BR string-map (3scm),
.BR open-input-string (3scm).
.SH STANDARDS
R4RS,
IEEE Scheme,
R5RS,
R6RS,
R7RS
.
\" .SH HISTORY
\" .
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
.
.SH BUGS
.
