.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2022 G. Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH string-set! 3scm 2022-05-14 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
string-set! \- modify a string element
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs mutable-strings))" "     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (scheme r5rs))" "              ;R7RS"
.BR "(import (scheme base))" "              ;R7RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(string-set! " string " " k " " char )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Stores
.I char
in element
.I k
of
.IR string .
.TP
.B R6RS
Implementors should make
.BR string-ref (3scm)
run in constant time, which may mean that this procedure will also run
in constant time.
.TP
.B R7RS
There is no requirement for this procedure to execute in constant
time.
\" .SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
\" .
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
.TP
.B R6RS
Returns unspecified values.
.TP
.B R7RS
Returns an unspecified value.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(define (f) (make-string 3 #\\*))
(define (g) "***")
(string-set! (f) 0 #\\?)       => unspecified
(string-set! (g) 0 #\\?)       => unspecified
             ; should raise &assertion exception
.EE
.
.SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
.
This procedure is rarely used to modify existing strings. It is
sometimes used to build up new strings, but a better option is often
to use an output string created by
.BR open-string-output-port (3scm),
which have the benefit that the output length does not need to be
known in advance.
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
This procedure works the same everywhere. Whether a string literal is
truly immutable depends on the implementation (but they should not be
mutated either way).
.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
In particular,
.I k
must be a valid index of
.IR string ,
which in turn must be a mutable string.
.TP
R7RS
The assertions described above are errors.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR open-string-output-port (3scm)
.SH STANDARDS
R4RS,
IEEE Scheme,
R5RS,
R6RS,
R7RS
.
.SH HISTORY
The first Scheme report to include this procedure was R2RS.
.
In R6RS this procedure was moved to its own library which is normally
not imported.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
