.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2022 G. Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH string-fill! 3scm 2022-05-14 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
string-fill! \- fill a string with a character
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs mutable-strings))" "     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (scheme r5rs))" "              ;R7RS"
.BR "(import (scheme base))" "              ;R7RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(string-fill! " string " " char )
.BI "(string-fill! " string " " char " " start ) "      \fR;R7RS\fP"
.BI "(string-fill! " string " " char " " start " " end ) "  \fR;R7RS\fP"
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Stores
.I char
in every element of
.IR string .
.TP
.B R7RS
Only modifies
.I string
between
.I start
(inclusive) and
.I end
(exclusive).
If omitted,
.I start
defaults to 0 and
.I end
defaults to the length of
.IR string .
.
\" .SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
\" .
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
.TP
.B R6RS
Returns unspecified values.
.TP
.B R7RS
Returns an unspecified value.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
;; R7RS example
(let ((s (make-string 4 #\\x)))
  (string-fill! s #\\y 2)
  s)  =>  "xxyy"
.EE
.
.SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
.
This procedure is used to fill strings that have already been created.
It has marginal utility. The second argument to
.BR make-string (3scm)
fills the entire string at creation time.
.
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
The
.I start
and
.I end
arguments are unique to R7RS.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
.TP
R7RS
The assertions described above are errors.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR make-string (3scm),
.BR string-set! (3scm)
.SH STANDARDS
R4RS,
R5RS,
R6RS,
R7RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
The first Scheme report to carry this procedure was R2RS, which also
had
.B substring-fill!
that filled a substring, but used a different argment order:
.BI "(substring-fill! " string " " start " " end " " char )\fR.
It is missing from IEEE Scheme.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
