.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2022 G. Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH string->list 3scm 2022-05-12 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
string->list, list->string \- convert between strings and lists
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs base))" "                ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (scheme r5rs))" "              ;R7RS"
.BR "(import (scheme base))" "              ;R7RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(string->list " string )
.BI "(string->list " string " " start ) "         \fR;R7RS\fP"
.BI "(string->list " string " " start " " end ) "     \fR;R7RS\fP"
.BI "(list->string " list )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B string->list
procedure returns a newly allocated list of the characters that make
up the given string.
.PP
The
.B list->string
procedure returns a newly allocated string formed from the characters
in list.
.PP
These procedures are inverses so far as
.BR equal? (3string)
is concerned, and preserve the order of the characters.
.TP
.B R7RS
The
.B string->list
procedure returns a newly allocated list
of the characters of string between
.I start
(inclusive)
and
.I end
(exclusive).
.
.SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
.
Some implementations have a single empty string object; see
.BR make-string (3scm).
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Both of these procedures return a single value. The
.B string->list
procedure returns a list (a pair or the empty list); the
.B list->string
procedure returns a string object.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(string->list "Quux")  =>  (#\\Q #\\u #\\u #\\x)

(list->string '(#\\f #\\o #\\o))  =>  "foo"
.EE
.
.SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
.
These procedures can be seen in some highly functional programming styles.
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
The
.I start
and
.I end
arguments are unique to R7RS. The only other difference between
implementations is whether the empty string is newly allocated or not
(see above).
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
In particular,
.I list
must be a list of characters and
.I string
must be a string.
.TP
R7RS
The assertions described above are errors.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR list->vector (3scm),
.BR string-append (3scm)
.SH STANDARDS
R4RS,
R5RS,
R6RS,
R7RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
These procedures first appeared in R2RS. They are missing from IEEE
Scheme.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
