.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2022 Gwen Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH substring 3scm 2022-03-28 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
substring \- copy part of a string
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs base))" "                ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (scheme r5rs))" "              ;R7RS"
.BR "(import (scheme base))" "              ;R7RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(substring " string " " start " " end )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B substring
procedure returns a newly allocated string
formed from the characters of string beginning with index
start (inclusive) and ending with index end (exclusive).
.PP
.I string
must be a string, and
.I start
and
.I end
must be exact
integer objects satisfying
    0 ≤ \fIstart\fP ≤ \fIend\fP ≤ \fB(string-length\fP \fIstring\fP\fB)\fP.
.PP
If
.I start
=
.I end
then the resulting empty string does not need to be newly
allocated, as per
.BR eq? (3scm).
.SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
.
.TP
.B Chez Scheme, Loko Scheme, (more?)
There is a unique empty string object.
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single string object.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(substring "SCHEMER" 0 6)  =>  "SCHEME"
.EE
.
\" .SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
\" .
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
This procedure is the same in all RnRS Scheme revisions since R2RS.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
.TP
R7RS
The assertions described above are errors.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR string-copy (3scm)
.SH STANDARDS
R4RS,
IEEE Scheme,
R5RS,
R6RS,
R7RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
This procedure was introduced in R2RS. Earlier revisions of Scheme
ran on MacLisp, which had a
.B substr
function that it in turn copied from PL/I. Instead of the
.I end
argument, it had an optional
.I length
argument.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
