.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright © 2021 Göran Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH textual-port? 3scm 2021-06-25 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
textual-port?, binary-port? \- test if ports are textual or binary
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs io ports))" "            ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (scheme base))" "              ;R7RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(binary-port? " port )
.BI "(textual-port? " port )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B textual-port?
procedure returns
.B #t
if
.I port
is textual,
and returns
.B #f
otherwise.
The
.B binary-port?
procedure
returns
.B #t if
.I port
is binary, and returns
.B #f
otherwise.
.TP
.B R7RS
These procedures accept any kind of object.
.
\" .SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
\" .
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single boolean object.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(call-with-input-file "/dev/null" textual-port?)
   => #t

(binary-port? (open-bytevector-input-port #vu8(1 2 3)))
   => #t
.EE
.
\" .SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
\" .
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
Some R7RS implementations may allow both
binary and textual operations on ports.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
.TP
R7RS
Passing the wrong number of arguments is an error.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR input-port? (3scm).
.SH STANDARDS
R6RS,
R7RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
New in R6RS and new in R7RS. In R5RS and earlier reports, ports were
conceptually textual.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
