.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2023 G. Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH utf-8-codec 3scm 2023-07-19 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
utf-8-codec, utf-16-codec, latin-1-codec \- predefined codecs
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs io ports))" "            ;R6RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI (utf-8-codec)
.BI (utf-16-codec)
.BI (latin-1-codec)
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
These are predefined codecs for the ISO 8859-1, UTF-8,
and UTF-16 encoding schemes.
.
.SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
.
.TP
.B The latin-1 codec
.
The latin-1 codec can only handle characters in the range [#\\x00,
#\\xFF]. The transcoding is a one-to-one mapping between the
byte values and character objects in the sense of
.BR char->integer (3scm)
and
.BR integer->char (3scm).
.IP
When transcoding in the input direction, each byte is read as
one character.
.IP
When transcoding in the output direction, characters less than #\\x100
are written as one byte. Otherwise the behavior depends on the
transcoder's error handling mode. In \f[CB]raise\fP mode an
.BR &i/o-encoding (7scm)
condition is raised; in \f[CB]ignore\fP mode the character is dropped;
and in \f[CB]replace\fP mode a \\x3F byte (#\\?) is written.
.
.TP
.B The UTF-8 codec
.
The UTF-8 transcoder can handle all Unicode characters. For characters
in the range [#\\x00, #\\x7F] there is a one-to-one mapping between
byte values and character object in the sense of
.BR char->integer (3scm)
and
.BR integer->char (3scm).
.IP
For characters above #\\x7F, UTF-8 tags the initial byte with a length
and then follows that byte with a number of continuation bytes. There
is a specific pattern that must be followed and any deviation is an
error. The same applies to short sequences. Errors are handled
according to the transcoder's error handling mode. In \f[CB]raise\fP
mode an
.BR &i/o-decoding (7scm)
condition is raised; in \f[CB]ignore\fP mode the character is dropped;
and in \f[CB]replace\fP mode an #\\xFFFD character is read.
.IP
Implementations vary in how many #\\xFFFD characters are produced for
an invalid sequence.
.IP
There are no encoding errors with the UTF-8 codec.
.
.TP
.B The UTF-16 codec
The UTF-16 codec works with pairs of bytes. The bytes are 16-bit
quantities encoded in either big endian or little endian. A byte
order mark (BOM) is either the byte sequence #xFE, #xFF for big
endian or #xFF, #xFE for little endian.
.IP
The 16-bit quantities mostly map directly to character objects
.BR integer->char (3scm). There is an exception for the range
[#xD800, #xDFFF], which are called the surrogate pairs. A pair of
these 16-bit quantities are used to encode characters that would
otherwise not fit in the 16-bit range.
.IP
Short byte sequences and errors in surrogate pairs are errors. In
\f[CB]raise\fP mode an
.BR &i/o-decoding (7scm)
condition is raised; in \f[CB]ignore\fP mode the character is dropped;
and in \f[CB]replace\fP mode an #\\xFFFD character is read.
.IP
There are no encoding errors with the UTF-16 codec.
.
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
A call to any of these procedures returns a value that is
equal in the sense of
.BR eqv? (3scm)
to the result of any other call to the same procedure.
.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
;; This is like utf8->string
(let* ((p (open-bytevector-input-port #vu8(194 169)))
       (tc (make-transcoder (utf-8-codec)))
       (tp (transcoded-port p tc)))
  (get-string-all tp))
        => "©"
.EE
.
.SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
.
These procedures are used when creating transcoders.
.
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
\" .SH COMPATIBILITY
\" .
.SH ERRORS
These procedures can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR make-transcoder (3scm),
.BR error-handling-mode (7scm)
.
.SH STANDARDS
R6RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
These procedures first appeared in R6RS as part of the reworked I/O system.
.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
