.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2023 Gwen Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH vector->list 3scm 2023-01-24 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
vector->list, list->vector \- conversion between vectors and lists
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs base))" "                ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (scheme r5rs))" "              ;R7RS"
.BR "(import (scheme base))" "              ;R7RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(vector->list " vector )
.BI "(vector->list " vector " " start ) "\fR         ;R7RS"
.BI "(vector->list " vector " " start " " end ) "\fR     ;R7RS"
.BI "(list->vector " list )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B vector->list
procedure returns a newly allocated list
of the objects contained in the elements of
.IR vector .
.PP
The
.B list->vector
procedure returns a newly created vector
initialized to the elements of the list
.IR list .
.PP
In both procedures, order is preserved.
.TP
.B R7RS
The
.B vector->list
procedure is limited to the elements between
.I start
(inclusive)
and
.I end
(exclusive).
These arguments default to 0 and the length of the vector, respectively.
.
.SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
.
.TP
.B Chez Scheme, Loko Scheme
The empty vector is a unique object, so
(list->vector '()) does not return a newly allocated vector.
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
These procedures both return a single value; a vector object or a list.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(vector->list '#(dah dah didah))
            => (dah dah didah)

(list->vector '(dididit dah))
            => #(dididit dah)
.EE
.
\" .SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
\" .
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
These procedures work the same everywhere except for the
.I start
and
.I end
arguments, which are only present in the R7RS variant of
.BR vector->list .
.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
.TP
R7RS
The assertions described above are errors.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.IP
In particular, if
.B list->vector
is passed a cyclical list then the procedure may not terminate.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR vector (3scm),
.BR list (3scm),
.BR list->string (3scm),
.BR vector->string (3scm)
.
.SH STANDARDS
R4RS,
R5RS,
R6RS,
R7RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
These procedures first appeared in R2RS. They were left out of IEEE
Scheme. But in spite of this,
.B list->vector
appears as an example in the standard.
.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
