.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2021 Gwen Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH vector-length 3scm 2021-01-03 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
vector-length \- the length of a vector
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs base))" "                ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (scheme r5rs))" "              ;R7RS"
.BR "(import (scheme base))" "              ;R7RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(vector-length " vector )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Returns, as an exact integer object, the number of elements in
\fIvector\fP. The length of a vector is fixed.
.
.SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
.
All extant implementations use fixnums to represent vector lengths,
but this is not required.
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single value which is the length of the vector.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(vector-length '#(1 2 3))
          => 3
.EE
.
.SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
.
The \fBvector-length\fP procedure sometimes appears in code that
destructures vectors, but in such cases it may be better to use a
pattern matching library such as \fB(chibi match)\fP.
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
Apart from error handling, this procedure is the same in all Scheme
reports.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
.TP
R7RS
The assertions described above are errors.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR make-vector (3scm),
.BR vector-ref (3scm),
.BR length (3scm).
.SH STANDARDS
R4RS,
IEEE Scheme,
R5RS,
R6RS,
R7RS
.
\" .SH HISTORY
\" .
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
