.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2022 G. Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH vector-map 3scm 2022-03-29 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
vector-map \- map a procedure over the elements of vectors
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs base))" "                ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (scheme base))" "              ;R7RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(vector-map " proc " " vector1 " " vector2 " ...)"
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
The vector-map procedure applies
.I proc
element-wise to
the elements of the
.IR vector s
and returns a vector of the results, in order.
.PP
.I Proc
is always called in the same dynamic
environment as
.B vector-map
itself.
.PP
The order in which
.I proc
is applied to the elements of the vectors is unspecified.
.PP
If multiple returns occur from
.BR vector-map ,
the return values returned by earlier returns are not mutated.
.
.TP
.B R6RS
The vectors must all have the same length.
.TP
.B R7RS
If more than one vector is given and not all vectors have the same
length,
.B vector-map
terminates when the shortest vector runs out.
\" .PP
\" Implementation responsibilities: The implementation must
\" check the restrictions on proc to the extent performed by
\" applying it as described. An implementation may check
\" whether proc is an appropriate argument before applying
\" it.
\" .
\" .SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
\" .
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single value which is a vector object.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(vector-map cadr '#((a b) (d e) (g h)))
        => #(b e h)

(vector-map (lambda (n) (expt n n))
            '#(1 2 3 4 5))
        => #(1 4 27 256 3125)

(vector-map + '#(1 2 3) '#(4 5 6 7))
        => #(5 7 9)          ; R7RS
        raises &assertion    ; R6RS

(let ((count 0))
  (vector-map
   (lambda (ignored)
     (set! count (+ count 1))
     count)
   '#(a b)))

=>   #(1 2) or #(2 1)
.EE
.
.SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
.
This procedure is used in place of
.BR map (3scm)
when vectors are used instead of lists.
.
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
The R6RS version is consistent with the R6RS version of
.BR map (3scm)
in that it requires all vectors to be the same length, and R7RS is
likewise consistent with its version of
.BR map (3scm)
in instead using the shortest vector.
.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
Likewise this is raised if
.I proc
does not accept a single value, and may be raised if it does not return
a single value.
.TP
R7RS
The assertions described above are errors.
Additionally it is an error if
.I proc
does not return a single value.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR map (3scm),
.BR string-map (3scm),
.BR vector-for-each (3scm)
.SH STANDARDS
R6RS,
R7RS,
SRFI-43
.
.SH HISTORY
.
The first RnRS report to carry this procedure was R6RS. R7RS also
included it, basing it on the semantics from SRFI-43.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
