.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2023 Gwen Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH vector-sort! 3scm 2023-01-25 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
vector-sort! \- (possibly unstable) sorting of vectors
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs sorting))" "             ;R6RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(vector-sort! " proc " " vector )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION

Destructively sorts
.I vector
in ascending order according to
.IR proc .
.
The procedure
.I proc
should accept two elements and return a true value when its first
argument is strictly less than its second, and
.B #f
otherwise.
.PP
The sorting algorithm may be unstable. This means that two elements
which are equal according to
.IR proc
but not according to
.BR eq? (3scm)
may change order.
.
.TP
.B Time complexity
The sorting algorithm performs O(n²) calls to
.I proc
where n is the length of
.IR vector .
.TP
.B Unspecified order and side effects
The pairing of arguments and the sequencing of calls to
.I proc
are not specified.
The procedure
.I proc
should not have any side effects.
.
.SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
.
Most practical sorting algorithms may be used, with Quicksort and
merge sort being common choices.
.
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
This procedure returns unspecified values.
.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(define v (vector 3 5 2 1))
(vector-sort! < v)             =>  unspecified
v                              =>  #(1 2 3 5)
.EE
.
\" .SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
\" .
.SH RATIONALE
.
The requirements placed on this procedure are less strict so that
simple in-place algorithms like Quicksort can be used.
.
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
These procedures are unique to R6RS. Alternatives are available in
SRFI-95 and SRFI-132.
.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
In particular,
.I proc
should accept two arguments, which are elements from
.I list
or
.IR vector ,
and return one value.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR list-sort (3scm)
.
.SH STANDARDS
R6RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
This procedure first appeared in R6RS.
.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
