.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2023 G. Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH vector->string 3scm 2023-01-27 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
vector->string \- convert a vector of characters to a string
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (scheme base))" "              ;R7RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(vector->string " vector )
.BI "(vector->string " vector " " start )
.BI "(vector->string " vector " " start " " end )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Returns a newly allocated
string of the objects contained in the elements of
.I vector
between
.I start
(inclusive)
and
.I end
(exclusive).
The order of the characters is preserved.
.PP
The argument
.I start
defaults to 0
and
.I end
defaults to the length of
.IR vector .
.
.SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
.
.TP
.B Loko Scheme
There is a single unique empty string object, so the returned string
will not always be newly allocated.
.
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single value; a string.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(vector->string #(#\\1 #\\2 #\\3))  =>  "123"
.EE
.
\" .SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
\" .
\" Slim to none.
.
.SH RATIONALE
.
R7RS says that this procedure and a few others were added in order to
round out the sequence operations.
.
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
This procedure is unique to R7RS. Compatible procedures can be found
in SRFI-133 and SRFI-152.
.
.SH ERRORS
It is an error to pass the wrong number of arguments,
and to pass an argument that is outside its domain.
In particular,
.I vector
must be a vector of
\fBcharacters supported by the implementation\fP,
.I start
must be non-negative and not greater than
.IR end ,
and
.I end
must not be greater than the length of
.IR vector .
The only characters that must be supported by
R7RS implementations are the ASCII characters minus NUL.
.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR string->vector (3scm)
.
.SH STANDARDS
R7RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
This procedure first appeared in R7RS.
.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
