.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright © 2023 Göran Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH vector-ref 3scm 2023-01-28 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
vector-ref \- access an element of a vector
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs base))" "                ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (scheme r5rs))" "              ;R7RS"
.BR "(import (scheme base))" "              ;R7RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(vector-ref " vector " " k )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.
Returns the contents of element
.I k
of
.IR vector .
.
\" .SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
\" .
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns a single value; an object from the vector.
.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(vector-ref '#(1 1 2 3 5 8 13 21) 5)
        => 8

(vector-ref '#(1 1 2 3 5 8 13 21)
            (exact
             (round (* 2 (acos -1)))))
        => 13
.EE
.
.SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
.
The specification of vectors does not actually require constant access
time, but in practice they are always implemented as flat arrays.
Therefore this procedure is used in algorithms that perform
random-access operations on arrays. Such algorithms would not have the
same time complexity if lists were used instead.
.
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
This procedure works the same everywhere.
.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
In particular,
.I k
must be an exact nonnegative integer less than the length of
.IR vector .
.TP
R7RS
The assertions described above are errors.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR make-vector (3scm),
.BR define-record-type (7scheme)
.
.SH STANDARDS
R4RS,
IEEE Scheme,
R5RS,
R6RS,
R7RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
This procedure first appeared in R2RS, where the vector notation was optional.
.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
