.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2023 G. Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH vector-copy! 3scm 2023-01-26 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
vector-copy! \- copy elements between vectors
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (scheme base))" "              ;R7RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(vector-copy! " to " " at " " from )
.BI "(vector-copy! " to " " at " " from " " start )
.BI "(vector-copy! " to " " at " " from " " start " " end )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Copies the elements of the vector
.I from
between
.I start
and
.I end
to vector
.IR to ,
starting at
.IR at .
.
.SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
.
.\" Text from R7RS
The order in which elements are copied is unspecified, except that if
the source and destination overlap, copying takes place as if the
source is first copied into a temporary vector and then into the
destination. This can be achieved without allocating storage by making
sure to copy in the correct direction in such circumstances.
.
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns an unspecified value.
.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(define a (vector 1 2 3 4 5))
(define b (vector 10 20 30 40 50))
(vector-copy! b 1 a 0 2)
b                           => #(10 1 2 40 50)
.EE
.
\" .SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
\" .
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
This procedure is unique to R7RS. Compatible procedures can be found
in SRFI-43 and SRFI-133.
.
.SH ERRORS
It is an error if the wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
.
It is an error if
.I at
is less than zero or greater than the length
of
.IR to .
It is also an error if (- (vector-length to) at) is less
than (- end start).
.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR vector-copy (3scm)
.SH STANDARDS
R7RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
R7RS got this procedure from SRFI-43.
.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
