.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2023 Gwen Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH write 3scm 2023-08-12 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
write, write-shared, write-simple \- write an object's external representation to a port
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs io ports))" "            ;R6RS, put-datum"
.BR "(import (rnrs io simple))" "           ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (scheme write))" "             ;R7RS"
.BR "(import (scheme r5rs))" "              ;R7RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(write " obj )
.BI "(write " obj " " textual-output-port )

; (rnrs io ports)
.BI "(put-datum " textual-output-port " " obj )

; R7RS only:
.BI "(write-shared " obj )
.BI "(write-shared " obj " " textual-output-port )
.BI "(write-simple " obj )
.BI "(write-simple " obj " " textual-output-port )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.
Writes the external representation of
.I obj
to
.IR textual-output-port .
There is no trailing delimiter.
.PP
.
If several subsequent external representations are written to an
output port, care should be taken to delimit them properly so they can
be read back in by subsequent calls to
.BR get-datum (3scm).
.
.PP
Any object can be written to a port, but only datums are expected to
have an external representation that can be read back the same with
.BR get-datum (3scm).
.
.TP
.B Default output port
If
.I textual-output-port
is omitted, it defaults to the value returned by
.BR current-output-port (3scm).
.
.TP
.B R7RS
Symbols that contain non-ASCII characters are escaped with vertical
lines.
.IP
The
.B write
uses datum labels in some situations.
.
If
.I obj
contains cycles which would cause an infinite loop using the normal
written representation, then at least the objects that form part of
the cycle must be represented using datum labels. Datum labels must
not be used if there are no cycles.
.IP
The
.B write-shared
procedure is the same as
.BR write ,
except that shared structure must be represented using datum labels
for all pairs and vectors that appear more than once in the output.
.IP
The
.B write-simple
procedure is the same as
.BR write ,
except that shared structure is never represented using datum labels.
This can cause
.B write-simple
not to terminate if
.I obj
contains circular structure.
.
.
.SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
.
The specific external representation is implementation-dependent.
However, whenever possible, an implementation should produce a
representation for which
.BR get-datum (3scm),
when reading the representation, will return an object equal, in the
sense of
.BR equal? (3scm),
to datum.
.PP
Not all datums may allow producing an external representation
for which
.BR get-datum (3scm)
will produce an object that is equal to the original. Specifically,
NaNs contained in
.I obj
may make this impossible.
.
.TP
.B Chez Scheme
Cycles in the output are detected even in the R6RS variant of
.BR write .
.
The
.B print-graph
parameter can be used to enable datum labels even for non-cyclic
datums.
.
.TP
.B Loko Scheme
Cycles in the output are detected even in the R6RS variant of
.BR write .
.
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
.TP
.B R6RS
Returns unspecified values.
.TP
.B R7RS
Returns an unspecified value.
.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(call-with-string-output-port
  (lambda (p)
    (write '(lambda (x) x) p)))
    =>  "(lambda (x) x)"

(define x (list 1))
(set-cdr! x x)
(write x)
  -> #0=(1 . #0#)

(define quux "quux")
(define x (list quux quux))
(write-shared x)
  -> (#0="quux" #0#)
.EE
.
.SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
.
Writing and reading external representations of datums is used for
data interchange and as an alternative to formats such as JSON and
XML.
.
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
The external representations of datums vary subtly between RnRS
revisions. Some differences: R6RS does not support datum labels, does
not support vertical bars around symbols and uses the \f[CR]#vu8(\fP
prefix for bytevectors instead of \f[CR]#u8(\fP as in R7RS.
.PP
Records have no standard representation in RnRS. SRFI-237 suggests
are way to solve this.
.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
In particular,
.I textual-output-port
must be an open textual output port.
.TP
R7RS
The assertions described above are errors.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR read (3scm),
.BR display (3scm)
.
.SH STANDARDS
R4RS,
IEEE Scheme,
R5RS,
R6RS,
R7RS
.
.SH HISTORY
.
The
.B write
procedure first appeared in R2RS.
The
.B write-shared
and
.B write-simple
procedures are new in R7RS.
.
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
\" .
\" .SH BUGS
\" .
