.\" -*- mode: nroff; coding: utf-8 -*-
.\" Copyright © 2021 Göran Weinholt
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH zero? 3scm 2021-01-06 "" "Scheme Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
zero?, flzero?, fxzero? \- test if a number is zero
.
.SH LIBRARY
.nf
.BR "(import (rnrs))" "                     ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs base))" "                ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (scheme r5rs))" "              ;R7RS"
.BR "(import (scheme base))" "              ;R7RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs arithmetic flonums))" "  ;R6RS"
.BR "(import (rnrs arithmetic fixnums))" "  ;R6RS"
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "(zero? " z )
.BI "(flzero? " fl )
.BI "(fxzero? " fx )
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Test whether the number object \fIz\fP is zero. This procedure works
on all number objects, up to and including complex numbers.
.PP
The \fBflzero?\fP variant is restricted to flonums and the
\fBfxzero?\fP variant is restricted to fixnums.
\" .SH "IMPLEMENTATION NOTES"
\" .
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.
Returns \fB#t\fP if the number is zero, otherwise \fB#f\fP.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.EX
(zero? 0)         => #t
(zero? 0.0)       => #t
(zero? 0.0+0.0i)  => #t

(zero? -1)        => #f
(zero? 1/2)       => #f

(fxzero? 0)       => #t
(flzero? 0.0)     => #t

(fxzero? 1/2)     => &assertion
(flzero? 1/2)     => &assertion
.EE
.
.SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
.
Used as a shorthand for \fB(= x 0)\fP. Use with higher-order functions
is rare.
\" .SH RATIONALE
\" .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.
The description is the same in all Scheme reports. Compatibility will
depend on general factors that affect the number system, such as
implementation support for complex numbers and IEEE 754 floating
point.
.PP
The restricted procedures are only specified in R6RS.
.SH ERRORS
This procedure can raise exceptions with the following condition types:
.TP
.BR &assertion " (R6RS)"
The wrong number of arguments was passed or an argument was outside its domain.
.TP
R7RS
The assertions described above are errors.
Implementations may signal an error, extend the procedure's
domain of definition to include such arguments,
or fail catastrophically.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR = (3scm),
.BR > (3scm).
.SH STANDARDS
R4RS,
IEEE Scheme,
R5RS,
R6RS,
R7RS
.
\" .SH HISTORY
\" .
.SH AUTHORS
This page is part of the
.I scheme-manpages
project.
It includes materials from the RnRS documents.
More information can be found at
.UR https://github.com/schemedoc/manpages/
.UE .
.
.SH BUGS
.
This procedure should normally not be used on inexact numbers since
inaccuracies in computations makes its use unreliable.
